TE 


ee eS 


PRTG ESA 


TEE ey 


Sei 


xm 


22A 71539 3 T 7 í s AIFID, 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2025 


https://archive.org/details/warpeaceO003tols 


hs 
GN 


er gor Books Collection 


WAR AND PEACE 


TOLSTOY 


WAR AND 
PEACE 


3 


Illustrations by 
Christian Wilhelm von Faber du Faur 


HERON BOOKS 


LONDON 


The illustrations of Christian Wilhelm 
von Faber du Faur were taken from the 
collection of lithographies entitled 
“Sheets from my portfolio sketched on 
the spot during the campaign in Russia 
of 1812", published at Stuttgart in 1845. 


Published by arrangement with 
J. M. Dent e» Sons Lid. 


© Heron Books, London 


THEY FRENCH*AT* MOSCOW 


I812—1820 


BOOK ELEVEN 


CHAPTER I 


THE fight at Schevardino had taken place on the 5th September; 
on the 6th not a gun was fired on either side; the 7th was the 
day of Borodino. Why and how were these battles fought? 
We ask in amazement, for no great advantage could result 
either to the Russians or the French. For the Russians they 
were a step farther towards the loss of Moscow, which was the 
catastrophe they most dreaded; and for the French a step 
nearer to the loss of their army, which no doubt filled them with 
equal apprehension. However, though both these consequences 
were self-evident, Napoleon offered battle and Koutouzow 
accepted the challenge. If any really good reasons had ruled 
the strategy of the rival commanders, neither ought to have 
fought then and there; for Napoleon ran the risk of' losing a 
quarter of his men at 2000 versts inside the frontier—the straight 
road to ruin, and Koutouzow, while exposing his army to the 
same danger, would lay Moscow open. For Koutouzow it was 
a plain mathematical calculation; as it would be for me were 
I to play draughts with one draught less than my opponent: 
if I exchange I am bound to lose and therefore must not exchange. 
When my adversary has sixteen draughts and I only fourteen, 
I am weaker than he is by an eighth, but when I have exchanged 
thirteen with him he is three times as strong as I am. 

Before the fight at Borodino the proportion of Russians to 
French in the respective armies was as 5 to 6; after it as 1 to 2; 
or as 100,000 to 120,000 before, and as 50,000 to 100,000 after; 
and yet Koutouzow, an intelligent and experienced veteran, 
made up his mind to the struggle, in which Napoleon, an 
acknowledged military genius, sacrificed a quarter of his men 
and extended his line. Though some writers have tried to 


1 


WAR AND PEACE 


prove that he believed he should close the campaign by taking 
Moscow as he had taken Vienna, it would be easy to demon- 
strate the contrary. Contemporary historians tell us that as 
soon as he had reached Smolensk he was anxious to find an 
opportunity of stopping; for while, on one hand, he was fully 
aware of the danger of extending his line over too wide an 
extent of country, on the other he foresaw that the occupation 
of Moscow would not give him a favourable position. He 
could judge of that by the state in which he found the evacuated 
towns, and by the silence which met his repeated attempts 
to reopen negotiations for peace. Thus both commanders—one 
in offering battle and the other in accepting it—acted absurdly 
and on no preconceived plan. Historians, reasoning from 
accomplished facts, have drawn plausible conclusions in favour 
of the genius and foresight of the two leaders, while, of all 
instruments ever employed by the Almighty to work out events, 
they were certainly the most blind. The ancients have trans- 
mitted to us their heroic poems, in which the whole interest of 
history lies in the heroes themselves, and we cannot yet get 
used to the idea, that in our humane times, such history is 
senseless. 

When we come to the question as to how the battle of 
Borodino was fought, the explanation given by historians is 
again entirely false, though they affect extreme exactitude. 
According to them this double engagement took place some- 
what as follows: “The Russians retiring and concentrating 
after the struggle at Smolensk sought the most favourable 
position for coming to a stand and giving battle, and found it 
in and round Borodino; they fortified it to the left of the high 
road from Smolensk to Moscow in a line between Borodino and 
Outitza, while, to watch the movements of the enemy, they 
threw up an earthwork on the mamelon of Schevardino. This 
was attacked and taken by Napoleon on the sth, and on the 
7th he fell upon the Russian forces in the plain of Borodino.” 
—This is what history tells us: but by giving a little careful 
study to the matter it is not difficult to convince oneself of the 
inaccuracy of the statement. It is not true that the Russians 
were seeking a better position; on the contrary, in their retreat 
they passed several very superior to Borodino; but—Koutouzow 
would not adopt one that he had not chosen himself; but—the 
desire of the country for a pitched battle was not yet strongly 
expressed ; but—Miloradovitch had not yet effected his junction. 
And there were numerous other buts, too many to enumerate. 


2 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


The fact remains that there were other preferable positions, and 
that at Borodino was no better than any other that might be 
pitched upon by chance on the map of Russia. Again, not only 
had not the Russians strengthened Borodino on the left—that 
is to say at the point where the battle was ultimately fought— 
but on the morning of the 6th no one had any idea that it would 
prove to be the scene of an engagement. As evidence on this 
point it may be said: 1st, That the redoubt in question did not 
exist on the 6th. It was only begun on that day and was not 
finished on the following day. 2nd, The spot chosen for the 
works at Schevardino, in advance of the spot where the battle 
was fought, was perfectly absurd. Why should that point be 
strengthened rather than any other? And why again, during 
the night of the sth, should the available forces have been 
weakened by detaching 6000 men to watch the enemy's move- 
ments when a patrol of Cossacks would have been amply 
sufficient for the purpose? 3rd, Do we not know that on the 
6th, the day before the battle, Barclay de Tolly and Bagration 
regarded the redoubt at Schevardino not as an advanced work 
but as the left flank of the position? And Koutouzow himself 
in his first despatch, written while the engagement was fresh in 
his mind, speaks of it in the same way. Subsequently, when 
detailed reports of the affair were drawn up, the inconceivable 
statement was put forward that the works at Schevardino were 
an advanced defence, while, in point of fact, it was only the 
extreme angle of the left flank; but this was said to cover the 
blunders of the commander-in-chief, who must at any cost be 
proved infallible; and it was stoutly maintained that the 
Russians had prepared to fight in a position chosen and fortified 
beforehand, while in truth the battle was quite unexpected and 
took place in a very exposed spot, almost undefended. 

The real course of events was as follows: The Russian right 
rested on the river Kolotcha, which crossed the high road at an 
acute angle; its left flank lay towards Schevardino, and its 
right by the village of Novoié; the centre facing Borodino at 
the meeting of the Kolotcha and the Voina. Anyone studying 
the battle of Borodino, and forgetting the circumstances under 
which it was fought, will perceive that the sole object of this 
position on the Kolotcha must have been to intercept the 
enemy's advance towards Moscow along the high road from 
Smolensk. Historians tell us that Napoleon, marching towards 
Valouiew on the sth, did not discover the Russians in their 
position between Outitza and Borodino (which he could not see 


3 


WAR AND PEACE 


because it was not there) nor their advanced posts. It was 
only when, in pursuit of their rear, that he accidentally ran 
against the left flank and the redoubt at Schevardino, and 
made his troops cross the river, to the great surprise of the 
Russians. Consequently, even before fighting had begun, they 
were compelled to withdraw the left wing from the point it was 
meant to defend, and retire into a position they had not 
strengthened nor intended to occupy. Napoleon, marching 
along the left bank of the river, between it and the high road, 
forced the future battle from right to left into the plain between 
Outitza, Séménovski and Borodino, to a plain just as suitable 
for battle as many other plains in Russia, and here it was the 
battle was actually fought on the 7th. 

If Napoleon had not crossed the Kolotcha on the evening of 
the 5th, and if he had next day insisted on a pitched battle 
instead of giving orders to storm the redoubt at once, no one 
could have said that this outwork was not on the left flank of 
the position, and the engagement would have been fought as 
was proposed. In that case the Russian left would of course 
have resisted more obstinately; Napoleon’s centre and right 
would have been attacked at once, and the great battle would 
have been fought on the sth, and on the spot where it had 
been planned. But as the Russian left was attacked in the 
evening, in consequence of the retirement of their rear, and as 
the Russian general would not, and indeed could not, engage 
so late in the day, the first and the most important half of 
the battle of Borodino was actually lost on the sth, and the 
inevitable result was a defeat on the 7th. By the 7th the 
Russians had only thrown up slight defences, and they were 
not finished. The generals aggravated the disaster by not 
attaching due importance to the loss of the left wing, which 
necessitated an entire reorganisation of their line, and by 
leaving their troops spread out between Novoié and Outitza, 
which involved them in a movement from right to left after 
the fighting had begun. In this way the French strength was 
concentrated all the time on the Russian left, which was not 
half as strong. 

Poniatowski’s attack on the French right between: Outitza 
and Ouvarov were quite independent of the general scheme 
of action. 

Thus the battle against the French right at Borodino was 
fought in a way quite unlike the descriptions given of it, which 
were written merely to cover the faults of the Russian generals; 


A 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


and this imaginary picture in fact only dimmed the glory of the 
army and the nation. It was not fought on a spot carefully 
selected and strengthened, nor with a small numerical difference: 
it was forced upon them on an exposed plain, after the redoubt 
had been taken, against forces twice as great as their own, 
and under conditions which did not even give them a hope of 
struggling for ten hours and leaving the day undecided; for it 
was obviously certain that they could not hold their own for 
three hours before they would be utterly defeated. 


CHAPTER II 


PETER left Mojaisk on the morning of the 6th. On the steep 
street that leads to the suburbs he left his carriage on a rise 
to the right, by the church where mass was being performed. 
A regiment of cavalry led by its singers was following close 
behind him, and meeting these, came a long row of carts 
bringing in the men wounded in the fray of the sth. The 
peasants leading them were storming at their horses, cracking 
their whips, and running from one side to the other; the wagons, 
each carrying three or four men, were desperately shaken over 
the stones flung down at random to represent a pavement. 
The wounded men, with limbs tied up in rags, pale, pinching 
their lips and knitting their brows, held on to the bars, jostling 
each other; almost all stared curiously at Peter's white hat 
and gréen coat. 

His coachman roughly ordered the peasants to keep on one 
side of the road; the regiment coming down the hill occupied 
the whole of it, and drove the carriage to the very edge; Peter 
himself had to stop and stand aside. At this spot, just above 
a bend in the road, the hill formed a brow, which screened it 
from the sun. In the shade it was damp and chill, though it 
was a fine, bright August morning. One of the carts full of 
wounded drew up within a few steps of Peter. The driver in 
his bast shoes ran up out of breath, picked up a stone to scotch 
the hind wheel, and arranged the harness; an old soldier with 
his arm in a sling, who was following on foot, helped with his 
sound hand, and turning to Peter, said: 

“I say, mate, are we to be left to die here, or to be dragged 
on to Moscow?” 

Peter, lost in thought, did not hear the question; he looked 


5 


WAR AND PEACE 


first at the cavalry regiment, checked by the carts, and then 
at the wagon that was standing near him. In it were three 
soldiers. And it seemed to him that here, in these men, he 
would find the solution of the problem that troubled him. One 
of them was wounded in the face; his head was wrapped in 
rags, leaving one cheek bare, swelled to the size of a child’s 
head; his eyes were fixed on the church, and he was crossing 
himself fervently. The second was a fair raw recruit, so pale 
that he seemed not to have a drop of blood left in his thin 
face; he looked down at Peter with a pleasant gentle smile. 
The third was lying down, and his face was invisible. At this 
moment the singers of the cavalry regiment came close to the 
wagon, their cheering strains mingling with the noisy ringing 
of church bells. The bright sun shone on the platform at the 
top of the hill, and brightened all the landscape, adding as if 
yet another note of gaiety; but where the wagon had drawn 
up, the wounded men, and the panting horse, and Peter standing 
by them, were in shadow, and mist, and gloom. The soldier 
with the swelled cheek looked at the singers out of the corner 
of his eye. 

“Well, what a lot of dandies!" he murmured reproachfully. 

“T have seen something besides soldiers to-day—I have seen 
peasants driven to the front," said the man who was leaning 
against the cart, with a melancholy smile. “They are not so 
particular now; they are going to throw the whole nation at 
their head. It has got to be done somehow." 

In spite of the incoherence of this statement Peter gathered 
the sense of it, and nodded affirmation. 

The road presently cleared; Peter went down the hill and 
got into his carriage again. As he drove on he looked out on 
both sides of the road for someone he knew, but he saw none 
but strangers, and all stared in astonishment at his white hat 
and green coat. After travelling about four versts, he at last 
saw a face he recognised, and at once hailed it: it was one of 
the physicians to the commander-in-chief, accompanied by a 
young doctor; his britzska met Peter's; he knew him at once, 
and signed to the Cossack who was seated on the box by the 
side of the coachman, to desire him to stop. 

“You, count! What brings you here, excellency?” 

“A wish to see what is going on, that is all." 

“Aye, aye! Well, you will see plenty to satisfy your curiosity.” 
, Peter got out to talk more at his ease, and expressed his 
intention of taking part in the battle. The doctor recom- 


6 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


mended him to speak to the commander-in-chief. “Otherwise 
you will not be recognised, and get put God knows where. . 

His highness knows you, and will receive you gladly. Take 
my advice; you will find it to your advantage.” The doctor 
looked weary and hurried. 

: d Do you think so?” said Peter. “Tell me how our position 
les. 

"Our position? Oh! that is not in my line; when you have 
passed Tatarinovo you will see; they are carrying loads of earth; 
go up the hill, and yeu will have a view of the whole plain." 

“Indeed; but if you . . ." 

The doctor broke off, and went towards his carriage. “I 
would have shown you the way with pleasure, I assure you,” 
he said. “But,” he added, with an energetic gesture, “I do 
not know whether I am on my head or my heels. I am on my 
way now to the general of the corps, for do you know how we 
stand? To-morrow we fight a pitched battle; out of 100,000 
men we must look for 20,000 wounded, let us say. Well, we 
have neither stretchers, nor hammocks, nor medical officers, 
nor surgeons even for 6000; we have 10,000 wagons, to be sure, 
but, as you may suppose, we require something besides that; 
and we are told to manage as we can." 

Peter stood thinking; out of those hundred thousand healthy 
men, young and old, some of whom at that moment were 
gazing in wonder at his white hat, twenty thousand were 
doomed irrevocably to death or suffering; the thought was 
acutely painful: "They may be dead to-morrow! How can 
they think of anything but that?" said he to himself, and a 
natural association of ideas brought up the picture of the steep 
street of Mojaisk, the carts full of wounded, the jangling of 
bells, the flood of sunshine, and the soldiers’ marching chorus. 
* And the cavalry regiment met all those wounded as it rode 
on to battle? Each man winks to the wounded and goes on, 
and never thinks of himself, or of what is awaiting him? but 
gazes at my hat with surprise—It is strange!” And he went 
on his way towards Tatarinovo. 

On the left stood a handsome country-house, with sentries 
on guard, and a crowd of carriages, fourgons, and military 
servants waiting in front. This was the residence of the com- 
mander-in-chief; he was absent at the present moment, and 
had left no representative at home; he and his staff had all 
gone to a Te Deum service. Peter went on to Gorky; having 
reached the top of the hill, as he went along the narrow village 


7 


WAR AND PEACE 


street he saw for the first time a party of militiamen in their 
white shirts, and caps with the badge of the cross, streaming 
with heat as they toiled, laughing and talking loudly, at a large 
earthwork covered with tall grass on the right of the high 
road. Some were digging, others carrying the soil in wheel- 
barrows running on boards, while some looked on with their 
arms crossed. Two officers standing on the top of the mound 
directed the work. These peasants, who evidently were enjoy- 
ing the novelty of military employment, reminded Peter of the 
old soldier’s speech: “They are going to throw the nation at 
the enemy’s head!” These bearded labourers, in the heavy 
boots to which they were not yet accustomed, with their sun- 
burnt necks and collar-bones showing under their open shirts, 
made a stronger impression on Peter than anything he had 
yet seen or heard, and brought home to him all the solemnity 
and importance of the crisis. 


CHAPTER III 


PETER mounted this hill, as the doctor had advised. It was 
now eleven o’clock, the sun, almost overhead, flooded the wide 
and varied panorama that spread before his eyes in the pure 
calm atmosphere. On his left the high road to Smolensk zig- 
zagged up a slope, and traversed a village nestling, with its 
white church, at about five hundred paces from the foot of the 
mamelon: this was Borodino. A little farther on the road 
was carried across a bridge, still mounting to the village of 
Valouiew, five or six versts away; beyond this village, held just 
now by the French, it was lost in a dense wood which reached 
to the horizon. Out of this mass of birches and firs rose a 
belfry, and a gilt cross twinkling in the sun: these marked 
the position of the convent of Kolotski. In the blue distance, 
to the right and left of the forest and the high road, the smoke 
of the bivouacs could be seen, and the confused masses of 
Russian and French troops. To the right the undulating 
ground that bordered the Kolotcha and the Moskva formed a 
succession of hillocks in which lay the hamlets of Besoukhow 
and Zaharino; on the left waved endless fields of wheat, 
surrounding the smoking ruins of Séménovski. 

The scene on which Peter looked down on either hand was 
so ill-defined that nothing answered to his expectations; there 


8 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


was no field of battle such as his imagination had pictured; 
but meadows, clearings, troops, the smoke of camps and villages, 
hills, brooks—all so mingled that he could not, in all the smiling 
landscape, discover exactly what the Russian position actually 
was, or distinguish their forces from those of the enemy. “I 
must ask,” thought he; and he turned to an officer, who was 
examining this huge and unmilitary stranger with some curiosity. 

“Would you have the goodness to tell me," said Peter, “the 
name of the village opposite?” 

“Bourdino, I believe," said the officer, referring to a comrade. 

“ Borodino,” corrected the other. 

The officer, charmed at having an opportunity of talking, 
went towards Peter. 

" And where are our troops?" 

“Out there, farther off, and the French, too; don't you see 
them out there?" 

* Where, where?" 

“Why, you can see them with the naked eye." And the 
officer pointed to the smoke rising on the left bank of the river, 
while his face assumed the grave expression which Peter had 
already seen on so many others. 

* Yes, those are the French?—But down there?" and he 
pointed to the left of the hill where they stood. 

“Well, those are ours!” 

"Ours? But beyond again?" And he waved his hand in 
the direction of a more distant height on which a single tree 
stood out against the sky, by the side of a village huddled into 
a hollow where black patches were moving about among thick 
clouds of smoke. 

**He,' again," ! replied the officer: it was in fact the out- 
work of Schevardino. “We were there yesterday, but ‘He’ 
is there to-day." 

“Then where is our position? " 

“Our position?” said the officer, with a polite smile. “I 
can show you exactly, for it was I who planned the entrench- 
ments. Follow me carefully. Our centre is here, at Borodino,” 
and he pointed to the village. ‘‘There is the bridge over the 
Kolotcha. Do you see a bridge in that little meadow where 
the hay is lying strewed in heaps? Well, that is our centre. 
Our right flank is here," and he pointed to the valley on the 


1 Napoleon was very commonly spoken of as “ LuZ,'' both by his enemies 
and his admirers. A poem of Victor Hugo’s begins “Toujours Lut, Lui 
partout.” 


WAR AND PEACE 


right; “out there is the Moskva; you see we have three strong 
redoubts there. As to the left flank, it is a little difficult to 
explain"; and he seemed embarrassed. “Yesterday it held 
Schevardino, where you see that single oak; but we have 
retired on the left as far as that burnt village and this height," 
indicating the hill of Raievsky. “But God alone knows whether 
the battle will be fought there. ‘He,’ to be sure, has brought his 
forces forward on that side, but it is a ruse: he is sure to turn 
to the right by the Moskva. . . . However, come what may, 
there will be many missing at the roll-call to-morrow!” 

An old sergeant who had come up to them was waiting in 
silence till his chief had ended his harangue; now, distressed 
by his last words, he interrupted him, saying gravely, "The 
gabions must be fetched up.” 

The officer looked slightly abashed, conscious, no doubt, that 
though he might be thinking of those that would be missing 
on the morrow, it did not do to speak of them. 

“Very well, send down the third company,” he said, sharply. 
“And who are you?” he went on. “Are you a doctor?" 

“No; I only came out of curiosity," said Peter; and he 
went down the hill again, past the militia party once more. 

“Oh, curse them!” said the officer following him, holding his 
nose and running past the labourers. 

“Here she comes! They are bringing her! She is coming! 
Here she is!" shouted a number of voices. 

Officers, regulars, and militia, all rushed to the high road. 
A procession was coming towards them, up the slope from 
Borodino. 

"It is our Holy Mother, our Guardian, our Mother of 
Iverskaia !" 

“No, no, it is our Holy Mother of Smolensk,” said another. 

The militia, the villagers, the fatigue party at work on the 
battery, all flung down their spades and ran to meet the pro- 
cession. At the head of it marched the infantry, bareheaded 
and with arms reversed, along the dusty road; behind them 
rose a solemn chant. Then came the clergy in full canonicals, 
represented by one old priest, some deacons, sacristans, and 
choristers. Some soldiers and officers were carrying a large 
image with a blackened face in a silver reliquary; this was 
the Holy Virgin that had been brought away from Smolensk, 
and that had ever since followed the army. On all sides, before 
and behind, came the mob of soldiery, marching or running 
and bowing to the earth. 


10 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


At last the procession reached the top of the slope. The 
bearers were relieved by others; the sacristans swung their 
censers, and the Te Deum was chanted. The scorching sun 
shone straight down, and a light fresh breeze played in the 
hair of the uncovered heads, and fluttered the streamers that 
garnished the image; the chant rose heavenward in a soft 
murmur. A space was left between the officiating priest and 
the deacons, and here, in the foremost rank, stood the superior 
officers. One bald general, wearing the cross of St. George, 
stood stiff and motionless, almost touching the priest—pre- 
sumably a German, for he did not cross himself, and seemed 
to be waiting patiently til! the ceremony was ended, though he 
considered it indispensable as reviving the patriotic enthusiasm 
of the people; another general, a martial figure, crossed himself 
incessantly while he looked about him. 

Peter recognised some of the faces, but he did not think of 
that; his whole attention was absorbed by the look of rapt 
devotion with which the soldiers and militia gazed at the 
miraculous image in their fevered excitement. When the 
choristers began the invocation to the Virgin—wearily enough, 
for this was at least the twentieth Te Deum they had sung— 
and the priests and deacons responded in chorus: “Most Holy 
Virgin, our invisible Bulwark and divine Mediatrix, deliver us 
thy slaves from disaster when we cry unto Thee!” every face 
wore that look of solemn feeling which Peter had already 
noticed in almost everyone he met. Heads were bent, hair 
thrown back, the men sighed and beat their breasts more 
vehemently. 

Suddenly the whole mass of people moved backward, almost 
upsetting Peter. A man of high dignity, no doubt, to judge 
from the eagerness with which all made way for him, came 
straight up to the image: this was Koutouzow on his way back 
to Tatarinovo, after reconnoitring the ground. Peter knew him 
at once. Wrapped in a long military cloak, round-shouldered 
and bent, with his blind eye, and his broad, fat cheeks, he 
walked unsteadily into the midst of the circle, paused just 
behind the priest, crossed himself mechanically, touched the 
ground with his hand, and bowed his grey head with a deep 
sigh. Bennigsen and the staff came behind him. Notwith- 
standing the presence of the commander-in-chief, which had 
distracted the attention of the generals, the privates and militia 
continued their prayers without allowing themselves to be 
disturbed. When the service was over Koutouzow stepped 


Hil 


WAR AND PEACE 


forward, knelt down with difficulty, touched the earth with his 
forehead, and then tried to rise; but his weight and weakness 
rendered his efforts futile, and his head shook with short jerks. 
When at last he had got himself vp, he put out his lips as 
children do and kissed the image. The generals followed his 
example, then the rest of the officers, and after them the privates 
and militiamen, pushing and jostling each other. 


CHAPTER IV 


PETER, borne forward by the crowd, looked vaguely about him. 

“Count, Peter Kirilovitch! what brings you here?" said a 
voice. Peter looked round and saw Boris Droubetzkoi, who 
came up to him smiling, while he beat off the dust that had 
clung to his knees in his genuflections. His dress, though 
suited to a soldier on service, was nevertheless elegant; he wore 
a long cloak like Koutouzow's, and like him, a whip hanging 
by a shoulder-strap. Meanwhile, the commander-in-chief had 
gone into the village of Gorky and was sitting in the shade of a 
cottage, on a bench that a Cossack had hastily brought out, 
and that another had covered with a rug. His numerous and 
splendid suite were standing about him; the procession had 
gone on its way accompanied by the crowd; and Peter, talking 
to Boris, found himself within thirty yards of Koutouzow. 

“Take my word for it," said Boris to Peter, who had been 
telling him of his wish to fight, “I shall be happy to do the 
honours of the count, and the best thing you can do, in my 
opinion, is to keep with Bennigsen; I am his orderly officer, 
and I will tell him you are there. If you want to get a good 
idea of the position, come with us; we are going down to the 
left flank, and when we come back pray put up at my quarters 
for the night. We might get a little party together—you know 
Dmitri Serguéiévitch; he lodges there; and he pointed to the 
third house in the village street. 

“But I wanted to see the right wing. It is said to be very 
strong; and then I should like to go along the Moskva and see 
the whole position." 

“You can do so, of course, but the left is the more important." 

* Can you tell me where to find Prince Bolkonsky’ s regiment? ” 

“We shall pass it. I will take you to him.” 

“What were you going to say about the left?” asked Peter 


12 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


“Between ourselves,” replied Boris, lowering his voice in a 
confidential manner, “the left flank is wretchedly placed. 
Bennigsen had a quite different plan: he was anxious to 
fortify that mound, out there—but his highness would not 
Bawesit; fot o5" 

Boris did not finish his sentence; he had just seen Koutou- 
zow’s aide-de-camp, Kaissarow, coming their way. 

“Paissi Serguéiévitch," said Boris, with an air, “I am trying 
to explain our position to the count ; and I admire his highness's 
acumen in having guessed the enemy's purpose so well." 

“The left flank, you mean?” said Kaissarow. 

* Just so; the left flank is formidable." 

Though Koutouzow had reduced his staff, dismissing all the 
useless members, Boris had contrived to keep his place by 
attaching himself to Count Dennigsen; who, like everyone 
else under whose orders Boris had served, entertained a high 
opinion of him. 

The army was indeed divided into two parties—the party of 
Koutouzow, and that of Bennigsen as chief of staff. Boris 
managed very skilfully, while he made a show of the greatest 
respect for Koutouzow, to insinuate that the old man was 
incapable of the conduct of affairs, and that it was Bennigsen 
who carried everything with a high hand. They were now on 
the eve of a decisive event, which must either crush Koutouzow 
and place the command in Bennigsen's hands, or else, if the 
Russians gained the day, good care would be taken to make 
it understood that the honour was due to Bennigsen. In either 
case rewards of every kind would be rife after the battle, 
and a number of obscure individuals would be brought to the 
front. The anticipation put Boris into a state of feverish 
excitement. 

Peter was soon surrounded by several officers of his acquaint- 
ance who had followed Kaissarow; he could scarcely answer all 
their questions about Moscow, or follow the stories of all kinds 
that were poured into his ear. The faces round him were 
anxious and agitated; but it struck him that this agitation was 
due to matters of purely personal interest, and he involuntarily 
compared it with that other deep and absorbed expression that 
he had observed on so many faces;—the look of those who, 
throwing themselves heart and soul into the national interest, 
understood that this was a question of life and death to all. 

Koutouzow, noticing Peter, sent his aide-de-camp for 
him; Peter obeyed the summons, but at the same moment a 


13 


WAR AND PEACE 


militiaman, slipping in front of him, also approached the 
commander-in-chief. This was Dologhow. 

* And how on earth did that fellow get here?” asked Peter. 

"'That creature sneaks in everywhere," was the answer. 
“He was degraded, but he comes up again like a cork... 
he has fifty different schemes in his head, and he made his 
way as far as the enemy's outposts. He is brave enough, that 
there is no denying." 

Peter respectfully took off his hat as he stood in front of 
Koutouzow, but Dologhow had got the commander-in-chief's ear. 

“I thought," he was saying, “that if I warned your highness, 
you would pack me off, or say the whole thing was known 
already." 

* Yes, very true," said Koutouzow. 

* But, on the other hand, if I should succeed I should be 
doing a service to my country, for which I am ready to die. 
If your highness should happen to want a man who is not 
particular about keeping a whole skin, I beg you will remember 
me; I might be of use to you." 

** Yes, yes," said Koutouzow, looking at Peter out of his one 
eye, with a smile. 

At this instant, Boris, with his courtier-like ease, came 
forward and stood by Peter, addressing him as if they were in 
the midst of a conversation: “And you see, count, the militia 
have got into white shirts to prepare for death. Is not that 
heroism?” 

Boris had spoken with the evident intention of attracting 
attention; and he had gained his point, for Koutouzow turned 
to him and asked what he was saying about the militia. He 
repeated his remark. 

“Yes, they are an incomparable race!” said Koutouzow, 
closing his eye and nodding his head. “Incomparable!” he 
murmured once more.—''So you want to smell powder?" he 
went on, addressing Peter. “A very pleasant smell, I have 
nothing to say against it! Ihavethe honour to stand on the list 
of your wife'sadmirers; howisshe? My campisat your service.” 

As often happens with old people, Koutouzow looked away 
in an absent manner; he seemed to have forgotten all he had 
to say, and all he ought to do. Suddenly remembering that 
he had an order to give, he beckoned Andrew Kaissarow, the 
aide-de-camp’s brother. 

" What are those verses by Marina, the lines about Ghéra- 
kow?” he asked. “Repeat them to me." 


14 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


Kaissarow repeated them, and Koutouzow nodded his head 
to the rhythm. When Peter moved away, Dologhow followed 
him and held out his hand. 

“T am delighted to meet you here, count," he observed in a 
distinct voice, not in the least abashed by the presence of 
strangers. ‘‘On the eve of such a day,” he went on with firm 
solemnity, “of a day when God only knows what awaits each 
of us, I am glad to have the opportunity of telling you how 
sorry I am for the misunderstandings that have arisen between 
us, and I beg you to efface all hatred of me from your heart. 
—I sincerely ask your pardon." 

Peter looked at Dologhow with a smile, not knowing what 
to say. Dologhow, with tears in his eyes, threw his arms 
round him. Just then Count Bennigsen, at a hint from Boris, 
proposed to Peter to accompany a reconnoitring party along 
the line. *It will interest you," he added. 

“Certainly it will," said Peter, and half an hour later 
Koutouzow made his way home to Tatarinovo, while Bennigsen 
with his staff and Peter, set off on his round of inspection. 


CHAPTER V 


BENNIGSEN went along the high road towards the bridge of 
which the officer had spoken as forming the centre of the Russian 
position; the hay, lying cut in the meadows on both sides of 
the river, perfumed the air. Beyond the bridge they rode 
through the hamlet of Borodino, and then, turning to the left, 
passed an immense train of soldiers and ammunition wagons 
coming down in front of a height on which the militia were 
throwing up earthworks. This redoubt was subsequently 
known as that of Raievsky, or the mamelon battery. Peter 
took no particular note of it; he could not guess that this spot 
would presently be for him the most memorable point in the 
battle of Borodino. 

They then crossed the hollow that divided it from Sémé- 
novski: the soldiers were carrying away such timbers as were 
left of the cottages and barns, and down over the undulating 
ground they crossed a field of rye, beaten and trampled as if 
it had been hailed upon, and followed in the path left by the 
artillery over a ploughed field, to reach the advanced works 
which were as yet incomplete. Bennigsen stopped and glanced 
at the redoubt of Schevardino which had been lost only the 


15 


WAR AND PEACE 


day before, and on which a few figures stood out against the 
sky. Napoleon, the officers declared, or Murat with a staff, and 
Peter, like them, tried to make out which might be Napoleon. 
A few minutes later the party went down and disappeared in 
the distance. 

Bennigsen, addressing one of the generals in his suite, ex- 
plained for all to hear, the position of the Russian forces. Peter 
did his utmost to comprehend what were the combinations 
that had given rise to this engagement, but to his great regret 
he felt that his intelligence was not equal to the task, and that 
he understood nothing about it. Bennigsen observing his deep 
attention presently said: 

“This cannot interest you, I am afraid?" 

* On the contrary," said Peter, not quite truthfully. 

Leaving the outworks behind them they got into the high 
road which went on to the left, winding its way through a wood 
of birch trees of dense growth but not very tall. In the midst 
of this wood they started a hare, which sprang into the road at 
their feet and ran on in front of them for some distance to their 
great amusement, till it was scared by the sound of horses or 
of voices, and bolted into a thicket. Two versts farther on 
they came out on a clearing where Toutchkow's corps were 
placed to defend the left flank. Having come to the limit of 
the position Bennigsen stood talking with much vehemence, 
and Peter concluded that he had come to some supremely 
important decision. In front of Toutchkow's division there 
was a knoll which was not occupied by the Russians, and 
Bennigsen criticised the oversight in strong terms, saying that 
it was absurd to leave such a commanding spot undefended, 
and to be satisfed with placing a force in the low ground. 
Some of the generals agreed with him. One, especially, main- 
tained with military energy that they were exposed to certain 
death. Bennigsen took upon himself to order the corps to 
occupy the hillock. 

This fresh arrangement of the left wing made Peter feel more 
than ever his incapacity for understanding the subtle ties of 
strategy; as he listened to Bennigsen and the generals dis- 
cussing the question he entirely agreed with them, and was 
astounded that such a blunder should ever have been committed. 
Bennigsen, not knowing that the division had been placed there, 
not to defend the position but to fall upon the foe unawares at 
a certain juncture, changed the plan without first informing 
the commander-in-chief. 


16 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


CHAPTER VI 


PRINCE ANDREW, that same afternoon, was lying down in a 
dilapidated cart-shed in the village of Kniaskovo, at the extreme 
end of the camp occupied by his regiment. Propped on his 
elbow he was looking out vaguely, through a crack between the 
boards, at the line of pollard birches that fenced in the farm, at 
the field where sheaves of oats lay scattered, and where the 
smoke rolled up from the fires over which the men’s supper 
was stewing. Sad, dreary, useless, as life now seemed to him, 
he felt—as seven years since he had felt before Austerlitz— 
excited and deeply moved. He had given his orders for the 
morrow; he had nothing more to do; his mind was agitated by 
curiously vivid, and consequently most gloomy presentiments. 
He foresaw that this engagement would be the most terrific in 
which he had as yet borne a part, and the possibility of death 
rose before him in all its cruel nakedness, apart from its 
bearings in relation to his present life and from any prospect 
of the effect it might produce on others. All his past life 
seemed to present itself, as in a magic lantern, in a long array 
of pictures which he had never before seen in the true light 
which now appeared to flood the scenes. “Yes, I see them all, 
—a series of delusive images which cheated my excited fancy!” 
thought he, looking at them in the cold relentless glare cast by 
the presence of death. “I see them plainly now, coarse counter- 
feits that I once could think beautiful and mysterious. Glory, 
the public weal, the love of woman, and even the love of my 
country! How grand, how all sufficing they seemed! But in 
truth everything is colourless, squalid, contemptible, in com- 
parison with the dawn of that day which, I feel, is rising for 
me!" He dwelt particularly on the three great sorrows of his 
life: his love for a woman, his father's death, and the French 
invasion. “Love! That little girl with her halo of charm! 
How I loved her! and what poetic dreams did I not indulge 
as I thought of the happiness we were to have together! I 
believed in an ideal love which would keep her faithful to me 
during my twelve months' absence; like the pigeon in the fable! 
Like the gentle dove in the fable she would grow pale and wan 
in my absence. And it all turned out much simpler. Fright- 
fully simple, and . . . horrible. My father, again, was working 
and building at Lissy-Gory, confident that everything was 
absolutely his own: the serfs, the soil, the very air he breathed. 


1 


WAR AND PEACE 


Napoleon came, and without even dreaming of his existence, 
swept him out of his path like a wisp of straw; Lissy-Gory was 
engulfed, carrying him with it in its ruin. And Maria persists 
in saying that it is a trial sent from Heaven! Why a trial— 
since he is no more; whom is it tc try? And Russia, and 
Moscow—lost! Who knows? To-morrow I may be killed by 
one of our own men, just as I might have been yesterday by 
that private who accidentally discharged his gun close to my 
ear. Then the French wul come and take me head and heels, 
and pitch me into a grave that the smell of my carcase may not 
make them sick; and then life in general will go on under new 
conditions, just as natural in their turn as the old ones—and 
I shall not be there to see!" He looked again at the row of 
birches whose silvery bark, standing out from the duller tints, 
shone in the sun: “Well, well, let them kill me to-morrow; 
there will be an end of it, and no more of me!” He pictured 
the world without himself; the waving, shadowy birches, 
the fleecy clouds, the camp-fires; everything suddenly took a 
terrible and sinister aspect; he shivered and started up to 
go out and walk about. 

He heard voices: ** Who goes there?” he cried. 

Timokhine, the red-nosed captain, formerly the captain of 
Dologhow’s company, and now for lack of officers promoted to 
be head of a battalion, came up shyly, followed by the aide-de- 
camp and the paymaster of the regiment. Prince Andrew 
listened to their report, gave them instructions, and was about 
to dismiss them, when he heard a well-known voice: 

" Deuce take it!" said the voice. 

Bolkonsky turned round and saw Peter, who had knocked 
himself against a water-spout. It was always distressing to 
Prince Andrew to come across anyone who reminded him of 
the past, and the sight of Peter, who had been so much mixed 
up with the unhappy events of his last stay at Moscow, was 
keenly painful. 

"What! You?" he said. “By what strange chance? I 
certainly did not expect to see you!" As he spoke his eyes 
and face assumed a hard, almost a repellent expression; Peter 
could not fail to observe it, and it changed the warmth of his 
address into embarrassment. 

“I came—well, you know—in short, I came because it is 
extremely interesting," he replied, using the same phrase for 
the hundredth time that day: “I wanted to see a battle." 

“And your brethren the freemasons? What will they say 


18 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


to that?” said Prince Andrew ironically. ‘What is doing at 
Moscow, and what are my people about? Have they got there 
at last?” he added more gravely. 

“They were there, Julia Droubetzkoi told me so. I went 
at once to call, but missed them: they had gone on, into the 
country.” 


CHAPTER VII 


THE officers were about to leave Prince Andrew with his friend, 
but Bolkonsky, not caring for a tête-à-tête, detained them, 
offering them a glass of tea. They looked with sume curiosity 
at Peter’s Herculean proportions, and listened without any 
excitement to his account of the state of Moscow and of the 
position of the troops he had seen. Prince Andrew kept silence, 
and his unpleasant expression led Peter to address himself in 
preference to Timokhine, who listened to him with frank good 
humour. 

* And you really understood the arrangement of our troops?" 
asked Prince Andrew, suddenly interrupting him. 

"Yes. So far, that is to say, as a civilian can understand 
such things. I got an idea of the general plan." 

“Then you know more about it than any other man alive!" 
retorted Prince Andrew in French. 


“Eh. .. . !" said Peter much puzzled, and looking over his 
spectacles. “But what, then, do you think of Koutouzow's 
appointment?” 


“Tt gave me great pleasure. That is all I have to say 
about it." 

“And what is your opinion of Barclay de Tolly? God 
knows what they don’t say of him at Moscow! What do they 
think of him here?" 

* Ask these gentlemen,” replied his friend. 

Peter turned to Timokhine with the friendly smile that every- 
one involuntarily wore when speaking to the worthy captain. 

* His highness's appearance at the head of the army threw 
daylight on the matter," replied Timokhine, with a timid glance 
at his chief. 

“How was that?” asked Peter. 

* For instance, as to wood and forage. When we began our 
retreat after Svendziani, we dared not take hay or fuel 


19 


WAR AND PEACE 


anywhere, and yet we were leaving it behind. It was all left for 
‘Him’—was it not, excellency?” he added, turning to “his 
prince." “And woe to us if we touched it! Two officers of 
our regiment were tried for offences of that sort. But when his 
highness took the command, it was all as clear as day.” 

“But why was it forbidden?” 

Timokhine, quite confused, did not know how to answer this 
question; Peter repeated it, however, turning to Bolkonsky. 

“In order not to spoil the country for the enemy,” said 
Prince Andrew, still sardonically. "It was a very wise measure, 
for pillage must be put down at any cost! And at Smolensk, 
he judged equally wisely, that as the French were superior to 
us in numbers, they could no doubt turn us. But what he 
could not understand,” he suddenly broke out, instinctively 
raising his voice, “was that we were defending Russian soil 
for the first time, and that our troops fought with a spirit that 
I have never seen equalled. That we had held out bravely 
for two days, and that this success increased our strength 
tenfold, he nevertheless ordered a retreat, and all our efforts and 
losses were rendered futile! Of course he did not mean to 
betray us, he had foreseen it all, and did what he could for the 
best. But that is the very reason why he is good for nothing. 
He is good for nothing at all, because he thinks too much, and 
looks at things too closely—all the Germans do. Besides— 
how shall I explain myself?—Supposing your father has a 
German servant, an excellent servant, who, under ordinary 
circumstances, does him a variety of service which you could 
not render—if your father falls ill you will send the man away, 
and nurse your father with your own clumsy hands; and you 
will soothe your father’s pain better than any stranger could, 
however clever. It is the very same thing with regard to 
Barclay: as long as Russia was well and flourishing, a foreigner 
could do her work, but in the hour of danger she needs a man of 
her own blood! At your club, I believe, he was accused of 
treachery? And what will be the upshot of these fictitious 
calumnies? Why, we shall rush into the opposite extreme; we 
shall be ashamed of such an odious imputation, and to make 
amends we shall treat him as a hero, which will be just as 
iniquitous. He is neither more nor less than a worthy and 
pedantic German.” 

“And yet,” observed Peter, “he is said to be a good 
commander." 

“T do not know what that means,” said Bolkonsky. 


20 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


* Well," said Peter, “a good commander is a man who leaves 
nothing to chance; who can guess what is in his enemy’s mind.” 

“That is impossible,” said Bolkonsky, positively, as if this 
was a point he had settled long ago in his own mind. Peter 
looked up in surprise. 

“And yet," said he. “Do they not say that war is like a 
game of chess?" 

“With this slight difference," said Prince Andrew, “that in 
a game of chess you can take your time, quite at your ease. 
Besides, the knight is always stronger than a pawn, and two 
pawns stronger than one; while in war a battalion is sometimes 
stronger than a division, and sometimes weaker than a single 
company. The relations of the strength of two armies is always 
an unknown quantity. You may depend upon it, that if the 
result were always directly due to the orders given by the staff, 
I would have remained a staff-officer, and have given orders 
with as good a grace as any man; instead of which, as you see, 
I have the honour to serve with these gentlemen, and command 
a regiment; and I am firmly persuaded that the issue of to- 
morrow’s engagement will rest with us rather than with them. 
Victory never can be, and never has been the outcome of position, 
or numbers, or the character of the arms; least of all of position.” 

“Of what then?” asked Peter. 

“Of the feeling that dwells in me—in him,” and he pointed 
to Timokhine—“‘in every soldier." Timokhine gazed in amaze- 
ment at his chief, whose excitement at this moment was in 
singular contrast with his usual reserve and calm demeanour. 
It was evident that he could not help giving utterance to the 
thoughts that crowded on him. “The battle is always won 
by the leader who is most determined to win it. Why did we 
lose the battle of Austerlitz? Our losses were not greater than 
those of the French, but we were in too great a hurry to believe 
ourselves beaten; and we believed it because we did not care 
about fighting out there, and were anxious to get away from 
the field of battle. ‘We have lost the game; let us be off ’— 
and off we went! If we had not said that until the evening God 
knows what the issue might have been ;—we shall not say it 
to-morrow! You say the left wing is weak, and the right too 
much extended. That is absurd, and not of the smallest con- 
sequence; but just think of what lies before us to-morrow. A 
thousand incalculable chances, any of which may prove decisive 
in an instant! Our men or theirs may turn and fly—this one or 
that may be killed! What has been done to-day is mere child's 


21 


WAR AND PEACE 


play, and the men who went round with you to inspect the 
positions, can do nothing to help the march of events; on the 
contrary, they hinder it if anything, for they look to nothing 
but their personal interests.” 

“What! Now at this moment?” asked Peter. 

“This moment," replied Prince Andrew, “is nothing to them, 
but the moment when it is most easy to supplant a rival and 
clutch at a ribbon or a cross. I, for my part, see just this: 
a hundred thousand Russians and a hundred thousand French 
will meet to fight to-morrow. The side that fights hardest and 
spares itself least will win the day; nay more. I tell you this: 
come what may, and whatever the antagonism of our generals 
may be, we shall win the day!” 

“That is the truth, and the whole truth, excellency," mur- 
mured Timokhine, “we must not spare ourselves! . . . Would 
you believe that the men of my battalion would not touch their 
brandy? It is not a time for that, they say." 

There was silence after this. The officers presently rose, and 
Prince Andrew went out with them to give his last orders. 
Just then horses’ hoofs were heard approaching along the high 
road. Prince Andrew, looking round, recognised Woltzogen and 
Klauzevitz, followed by a Cossack; they passed so close that 
Peter and Bolkonsky could hear them talking in German. 

“The war must spread—that is our only hope." 

“Yes,” replied the other. “From the moment when the 
first point is to weaken the enemy, the loss of a few men more 
or less cannot matter." 

“To be sure," said the first speaker. | 

“Oh! yes, spread the war!" said Prince Andrew, passion- 
ately. “That is how my father, my sister, and my boy have 
gone down before it! Much he cares! That is just what I 
was telling you: these German gentry are not the men to win 
the battle, take my word for it. All they will do is to shuffle 
the cards as much as possible; for that German's head contains 
nothing but a heap of arguments of which the best is no sounder 
than an egg-shell, while he has not in his soul one grain of the 
stuff that is in Timokhine, and which will be needed to-morrow. 
They have handed over all Europe to ‘Him,’ and now they 
want to teach us! A pretty lesson, on my word!” 

“ And you think we shall beat them?" 

“Yes,” said Prince Andrew, absently. “But there is one 
thing I would not have allowed if I could have prevented it, 
and that is giving quarter. Why take prisoners? It is mere 


22 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


Quixotism! The French have destroyed my home; they are 
about to destroy Moscow; they are my enemies; they are 
criminals! Timokhine and all the army feel the same; they 
can never be our friends, in spite of all they could say at Tilsit.” 

“Yes, certainly!“ cried Peter, with sparkling eyes, “there I 
entirely agree with you.” 

The problem which had been tormenting him ever since he 
had left Mojaisk had, in fact, found a clear and final solution. 
He now understood the meaning and solemnity of the war, and 
of the battle about to be fought. All that he had seen in the 
course of the day: the expression of gravity and devotion on 
the soldiers’ faces, the latent heat of patriotism—to use a 
metaphor from physics—which glowed in each man, were now 
intelligible to him, and he no longer wondered at the calmness, 
the positive indifference even, with which they prepared to 
meet death. 

“If no prisoners were taken," Bolkonsky went on, “the 
aspect of war would alter; and believe me it would be less cruel. 
But we have only been playing at war; that is where the 
mistake lies. We play the magnanimous, and such generosity 
and sensibility are on a par with those of a milksop who turns 
sick at seeing a calf killed: the sight of blood disgusts his instinc- 
tive delicacy; but dress the veal with a savoury sauce, and he 
will eat it with the rest of us. They preach at us about the 
laws of warfare, chivalry, flags of truce, humanity to the 
wounded, and what not! But this is only throwing dust in 
each other’s eyes. I saw some of this chivalry in 1805; we were 
duped, and we deceived them in our turn. Homes are made 
desolate, false money is circulated, our fathers or our children 
are murdered—and then we are to listen to a rhodomontade 
about the rules of war and generosity towards our enemies! No 
quarter, I say. Kill without ruth, and be ready to be killed! 
The man who has come to this conclusion, as I have, through the 
most cruel suffering . . ." Prince Andrew had worked himself 
up for a moment into a belief that he could bear to see Moscow 
fall as Smolensk had done; but he broke off. A spasm in his 
throat chaked him, and he walked on a few steps in silence; when 
he spoke again his eyes glittered fiercely, and his lips were 
quivering. 

“If there were no such false generosity in war it would not 
be undertaken but for weighty reasons, with the knowledge 
that it meant death; not because Paul Ivanovitch had given 
offence to Michael Ivanovitch! All these Hessians and 


23 


WAR AND PEACE 


Westphalians that Napoleon has dragged at his heels would never 
have come to Russia, and we should not have gone to fight in 
Austria and Prussia, without knowing wherefore. The fearful 
necessity of war ought only to be taken seriously and sternly. 
There are lies enough in the world as it is. War should be 
treated as a hard fact; not as a game; otherwise it becomes a 
mere pastime for the idle and frivolous. There is no more 
honourable class than the military, and yet to what extremities 
they are driven to gain their ends! In fact, what is the aim 
and end of war?—Murder.—And its means?—Treachery and 
spying.—lts procedure? Pillage and robbery for the main- 
tenance of the men! . . . That is to say, falsehood and dis- 
honesty in every form, under the name of the Art of War.— 
What, I ask you, is the rule to which military men are bound? 
To slavery, that is to say, to a rigorous discipline, which condones 
indolence, ignorance, cruelty, depravity, drunkenness—and yet 
they are universally respected. Every monarch in the world, 
except the Emperor of China, wears a military uniform, and 
the man who has killed the greatest number of his fellow- 
creatures wins the highest rewards. A million of men meet— 
as they will to-morrow, for instance—to massacre and maim 
each other; and what follows next? Why, Te Deums and 
solemn thanksgivings for the great number of slain—though 
the figures, to be sure, are always exaggerated; and the victory 
is loudly boasted of, for the more men are killed the more 
brillant it is thought to be. And those prayers! how can 
they be acceptable to God, looking down on the world? Ah! 
my friends, life has been a grievous burden to me during these 
last months; I see too far into things, and it goes hard with 
man when he has eaten of the tree of knowledge of good and 
evil. However, it is not for long now! . . . But forgive me; 
my wandering talk will have wearied you—as ithas me . . . It 
is late; go back to Gorky." 

"No, indeed!" exclaimed Peter, fixing a scared but sym- 
pathetic look on his friend's face. 

“Yes, go; we must sleep before fighting,” said Prince Andrew, 
going up to Peter and embracing him warmly. ‘Good-bye. 
Shall we ever meet again? God knows!" He pushed him to 
the door and turned away. 

It was now dusk, and Peter could not read the expression of 
his face. Was it tender or stern? He paused a moment in 
doubt; should he go in to him again or return to headquarters. 

“No, he does not want me; I know that this is our last 


24 


Why take prisoners? 


X 


ue. 

‘beat? Suir 
a) -— ys 

eae | 


wy ti t1 = 


K A a 
j 
Té ais LECT. NN 
E a SA 
E A me 
OM NILUS 
4 "a p! 

A'u G 
Pl) " 
ATA 

! 
íi 
; 2 
$ 


b 
[ 1 
' 2 
y pray L% 
A A » 
dA yos 
E a 
! 
M. 
i, a 
M 


2. | 
EI 


TV - i vaa ^ 


M w^ Ws qM 


f 
bis = 
5. "3E 
» 
B 
» 
X 
e M 
vhi 
(e«t i 
ne 
i 
i < 
, Lind 
Li 


AP vem | 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


meeting,” he concluded; and with a deep sigh he set out for 
Gorky. 

Prince Andrew stretched himself on a rug, but he could not 
sleep. Among the medley of thoughts and memories that 
whirled through his brain he lingered over one with tender 
emotion: it was that of a certain evening at St. Petersburg, 
when Natacha had told him, with wonderful spirit, of how, in 
the previous summer, she had lost her way one day when she 
had gone out to gather mushrooms in a vast forest. She had 
described in broken sentences the silence of the woods, her 
emotions, and her talk with an old man who kept bees, inter- 
rupting herself constantly to say: “No, not exactly that—I 
can never express precisely what I mean—I am sure you can 
not quite understand! . . ." And in spite of Prince Andrew's 
assurances, she was vexed with herself for not being able to 
give an adequate idea of the lofty and poetic feeling that filled 
her then. “The old man was quite charming—and the forest 
was so dark—and he had such good, kind eyes—but oh! I 
cannot tell you, I can never tell a thing properly!" and she 
blushed crimson. Prince Andrew smiled at the recollection, as 
he had smiled at the time when he looked at her. “I under- 
stood her then," thought he. “I understood her simplicity 
and the ingenuousness of her soul; yes, it was her soul that 
was so dear to me, that I loved so perfectly, so fervently, with 
a love that made me exquisitely happy!" But he shuddered, 
suddenly remembering what the end had been. “He did not 
want all that; He could not see nor understand. To him she 
was nothing but a pretty, fresh creature whom he disdained to 
link with his fate, while to me And Ze is still living and 
enjoying himself!" But at this reflection he winced as if he had 
been branded with a hot iron; he started to his feet and again 
took to walking up and down his room. 


CHAPTER VIII 


On the 6th of September, the eve of the battle of Borodino, 
arrived Monsieur de Beausset, Master of the Household to the 
Emperor of the French, and Colonel Fabvier, one from Paris, 
the other from Madrid; they found Napoleon in his camp at 
Valouiew. Monsieur de Beausset, in court uniform, heralded 
his approach by sending in a packet addressed to the emperor 
which he had been charged to deliver. He went into the 


25 


WAR AND PEACE 


outer room of the imperial tent and undid the wrapper as he 
stood talking with the aides-de-camp. Fabvier, pausing at 
the threshold, was speaking to someone outside. Napoleon was 
dressing in the inner room, which was his bedroom, turning 
himself about for his valet to brush him—first his broad shoulders 
and then his bulky person, with evident enjoyment. Another 
valet, holding his finger loosely over the mouth of a bottle, was 
sprinkling his master’s fat person with eau de Cologne, "with 
intense conviction that he alone knew how many drops were 
needed, or exactly where to shed them. The emperor's closely 
cropped hair clung to his brow with the moisture, and his face, 
though sallow and puffy, expressed physical welfare. 

* Go on, harder, go on," he said to the valet, who brushed 
away with renewed vigour. 

An aide-de-camp, who had come with a report of the engage- 
ment of the day before and of the number of prisoners, was 
awaiting his dismissal in the doorway. Napoleon glanced at 
him with a sidelong scowl. 

‘‘What?” he said. “No prisoners! then they prefer to be 
cut to pieces. So much the worse for the Russian army!" 
Then, still turning his wide back and shoulders to the soothing 
friction of the brush—* Very good; show in Messieurs de 
Beausset and Fabvier. 

* Yes, sire" said the aide-de-camp, hurrying off. 

The two valets dressed their master in less.than no time, in 
the dark blue uniform of the Guards, and he went into the 
larger room with a firm, quick step. Meanwhile Beausset had 
hastily unpacked the present from the empress, and had placed 
it on two chairs in front of the door the emperor must come 
in by; but Napoleon had finished his toilet so promptly that 
Beausset had not had time to arrange it quite to his satisfac- 
tion. It was to be a surprise to his majesty. Napoleon saw 
that he was embarrassed about something, but, pretending not 
to have noticed it, he signed to Fabvier to come forward. He 
listened with his brows knit and in utter silence to the colonel's 
laudatory report of the troops' fighting at Salamanca—at the 
other side of the world—who, according to his description of 
them, had but one absorbing ‘idea: that of proving worthy of 
their emperor; and but one single fear: that of displeasing 
him. Nevertheless the result had not been victory; and 
Napoleon comforted himself by asking sarcastic questions, 
which tended to show that he expected nothing better when he 
was not on the spot. 


26 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


“I must make up for it at Moscow,” said Napoleon. ‘‘Good- 
bye for the present" ; and he turned to Beausset, who had had 
time to throw a drapery over the empress's gift. 

Beausset came forward with an elaborate French bow, such 
as none ever learned to make but the old courtiers of the Bourbon 
days—and handed him a sealed letter. Napoleon sportively 
pinched his ear. 

“You have made haste," he said, “and I am glad of it. Well, 
and what is the news from Paris?" he added, suddenly looking 
grave. 

“Sire, all Paris bewails your absence," replied the courtier. 

Napoleon knew perfectly well that this was merely skilful 
flattery. In his more lucid moments he also knew that it 
was false; but the phrase pleased him, and again he pinched 
Beausset's ear. 

“T am sorry," he said, “to have brought you so far.” 

“Sire, I fully expected to follow you to the gates of Moscow." 

Napoleon smiled, and glanced carelessly to the right. An 
aide-de-camp, with a graceful bow, offered him a gold snuff- 
box. 

“Yes, you are in luck," said he, taking a pinch. “You like 
travelling, and in three days you will be at Moscow. You did 
not expect ever to see the Asiatic capital?" 

Beausset bowed in gratitude to his sovereign for having 
invented a taste for him of which he himself had no suspicion. 

* Ah! what is that?" said Napoleon, observing the attention 
of the suite directed to a hanging. Beausset, with the neatness 
of an accomplished courtier, deftly skipped round and whipped 
away the curtain, saying: 

“Tt is a present sent by the empress to your majesty.” 

It was a portrait, painted by Gérard, of the child born of 
the marriage of Napoleon with the daughter of the Emperor 
of Austria and who was known as the King of Rome. The lovely 
little boy, with curly hair and eyes like those of the Infant Christ 
in the Sistine Madonna, was playing with a cup and ball: the ball 
represented the terrestrial globe, while the cup, reversed, was a 
sceptre. Though it was hard to say why the artist should have 
painted the King of Rome as piercing the globe with a spike, the 
conceit was thought as clear and subtle by all who had seen the 
picture at Paris, as, at this moment, it seemed to Napoleon 
himself. 

“The King of Rome!” he exclaimed, with a gracious move- 
ment. “Admirable!” He had a peculiarly Italian facility 


27 


WAR AND PEACE 


decamp: be Gaurd that Se pars Teak de Gara aa 
Sule his ment, hat the “Vind Gade” mna have rhe Raa 
a Tut alae’ RON § VB a 


Gay te Suauss 
"Short, and t the pud!" was bs comment, an be med quer 
the address wich he had Gitar «u)heu & mauus 
“Snigiess!* 
E a Tm 
eee 


nacen giak ren coker ke ides o 
pustertk may speak af vuur cundaet X N 
ma amem yan: “He was ai that grat hak? i. 
l “Nara” 

Be iia Memseur Ranne was @ Rag af sexe 
Anra annungany lim, and wert quip af hs Raat Rows De 
horses whieh bad just been eddlied 

“Yeur majesty ds tea gewd!" ait Rant theagh Be 
desperately mended Skep amd cau set RR bat when 
Namikan dowed his hem Rant had ae Gace Bee we Oe, 

As the emperer apreaced am the Same Se Meas af £e 


THE VELECR AT MOSCOW 
KAIND HO ul) AIUD II Oh jl oot, ISE A IID, 
: duit hio d 


“Spite Aut) WII / Whe Wie, pM, up Te pr ao De te 
M e^ Mp) MW po M ae I 

AAA), CVM) aae OY WA AL: Jo, Wh HID G Phy MP; 
AMY M, VY M ADA PDEA Be WY DID Gs Obs 
€ A 


Oe Mtf in) JI Soden Aus Wythe t uh CYP, OA 
Ht Mab) Bit GI, 


i 
n 
i 
i 
F 


pats 
it 
Ur 
itis 
Ht 
i i 
1 X 
w 
i 


st 
J 
H 
d 
i 


i 
li 
li 

: 
Hu 


d 
Hi 
è 
. 
| 


Lr id w 
Dars, Piss, A VAAK, Mapsyian, AA qot S Di 


IIA D uto BIBA Do he aA 
hawai Ge mahs, Bra Sey, Lou É OYA, 
wes, uo AIEA Dihs TAY Mg GIIA E 


WAR AND PEACE 


some minutes, and then pointed out two points where he wished 
batteries to be placed on the morrow to fire against the Russian. 
works; also the position to be occupied by the field-guns. 

These various arrangements which have given rise to the 
most unbounded admiration on the part of French historians, 
and unanimous approbation among foreigners, were laid down 
as follows: 


“Two new batteries are to be thrown up during the night 
on the plain occupied by the Prince of Eckmühl, and to open 
fire, at daybreak, on the enemy's two batteries opposite. 

“General Pernetti, colonel of the 1st Artillery Corps, is to 
advance with 30 guns of Compans’ division and all the howitzers 
of the Desaix and Friant divisions; he is to open fire, and throw 
his shells on the enemy’s battery, which will thus be attacked by 


Guns of the artillery of the Guards . sual 


Guns of Compans’s division . 2:130 
Guns of Desaix's and Friant's dixisiona s MA 
nial lee ë . 62 


“General Fouché, in command of the 3rd Artillery Corps, is 
to bring up the howitzers of the 3rd and 8th Corps, in all 16 
guns, to flank the battery which is to bombard the work on 
the left, thus bringing 40 guns to bear on that redoubt. 

“General Sorbier will remain in readiness to advance at the 
first word, with all the guns of the Artillery Guards, against 
either of the enemy’s entrenchments. 

“During the cannonade Prince Poniatowski must march 
down on the village in the forest and turn the enemy’s position. 

* General Compans is to go through the forest and seize the 
first entrenchment. 

" As soon as the action has fairly started on these lines, 
further orders will be issued according to the enemy's move- 
ments. 

“The left wing is to open fire as soon as that of the right 
wing makes itself heard. Morand’s division of sharpshooters 
and the Viceroy's division are to open fierce fire as soon as the 
attack on the right is begun. 

“The Viceroy must seize the village,! crossing its three bridges, 
and advancing on the same line as Morand's and Gérard's 
divisions, which being led by him, will march on the redoubt, 
and join the other troops. 

! Borodino. 


30 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


“The whole to be carried out with strict good order, and 
keeping some troops in reserve as far as possible. 
“Given at the Imperial Camp at Mojaisk, Sept. 6th, 1812.” 


If the arrangements of such a man as Napoleon may be 
criticised independently of the influence of his genius, which 
was almost a superstition, it is very evident that these orders 
are deficient in conciseness and accuracy. They resolve them- 
selves, in fact, into four lines of action, neither of which could 
be—or was—carried out. First: the batteries placed on a spot 
selected by Napoleon, and strengthened by the guns under Perneiti 
and Fouché, 102 in all, were to open fire and silence the advance 
works on the Russian side. Now it was impossible to effect this, 
because the French projectiles could not be thrown far enough 
to fall within the enemy’s works, so that these 102 guns were 
firing in the air till one of the generals took upon himself to 
send them forward, against the emperor’s orders. 

The second command, by which Poniatowski was to march 
down on the village through the forest, and to turn the Russian 
left, could not be obeyed, since Poniatowski was met in the 
forest by Toutchkow, who barred the way and prevented his 
turning the position pointed out to him. The third instructed 
General Compans’s corps to go by the forest and seize the first 
entrenchment; but it failed to do so, because, on leaving the 
forest, it found itself obliged to re-form under the fire of Russian 
musketry, a circumstance of which Napoleon could not be 
aware. With regard to the fourth arrangement, by which the 
viceroy was to take the village of Borodino, and, after crossing 
the river by the three bridges, to follow the same line of march as 
the divisions under Morand and Friant (it may be noted that 
what that line was to be is nowhere indicated). They were, 
however, to proceed to the redoubt, under his command, and form 
ın a line with the other troops. So far as it is possible to make 
anything of this unintelligible order by the light of the efforts 
made by the viceroy to carry it out, it would seem that he was 
to make his way to the left towards the redoubt after passing 
through the village of Borodino, while Morand’s and Frian’s 
divisions advanced in front of the line. All this was impossible. 

The viceroy got through Borodino, but was beaten on the 
Kolotcha, and Morand and Friant, after experiencing the same 
fate, failed to take the redoubt, which only yielded to the 
cavalry towards the end of the engagement. So that none of 
the orders was or could have been carried into effect, 


Sl 


WAR AND PEACE 


It was added that subsequent commands would be issued 
according to the movements of the enemy. It was, therefore, to 
be presumed that Napoleon would take the necessary measures 
during the progress of the engagement; but he did nothing 
of the kind; for, as afterwards transpired, he was himself so 
far from the centre of the action that he could not follow it, 
and none of the orders he issued during the fight could possibly 
be executed. 


CHAPTER X 


SEVERAL historians have asserted that the Russians won the 
day at Borodino because Napoleon was suffering from a cold. 
But for that cold, his combinations would have borne the stamp 
of genius throughout, Russia would have lost, and the face of 
the world would have been changed. Such a conclusion, namely 
that Russia remained great because Napoleon had a cold in his 
head on the 6th, may be held indisputable by writers who 
can maintain that the mere sovereign will of Peter the Great 
transformed Russia; or that the will of Napoleon alone meta- 
morphosed the French Republic into an empire, and bore the 
arms of France on to Russian soil. If it had indeed depended 
on him whether the action were fought or not, whether this or 
that decision were taken or not, that cold, by paralysing his 
energies, would in fact have been the direct cause of Russia’s 
escape; and the valet who, on the 4th September, neglected to give 
him waterproof boots, might be called her deliverer. Granting 
such logic as this, the inference as is plausible as Voltaire’s when, 
in jest, he ascribed the massacre of St. Bartholomew to Charles 
IX. having a fit of indigestion. But to those who cannot accept 
this manner of argument, such a reflection is simply absurd, and 
in obvious contradiction to human reason. To the question as 
to what is the real causation of historical events, it seems to us 
much simpler to say that the course of this world is foreordained, 
and depends on the coincidence of the wills of all those who are 
concerned in the issues; so that the good pleasure of a Napoleon 
has only a superficial influence. 

And though it may at first seem hard to believe that the great 
massacre decreed by the desire of Charles IX. was not the out- 
come of his will, or that the slaughter at Borodino of some 
80,000 men was not the act and deed of Napoleon, though the 


02 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


orders were given by them, I feel justified in coming to this 
conclusion by a due consideration of the dignity of humanity, 
which convinces me that every man is as much a Man as 
Napoleon himself; and this is confirmed in many ways by the 
researches of historians. On the day of Borodino Napoleon 
neither aimed a gun nor killed a man. Everything was done 
by his soldiers, who killed their enemies, in obedience, not to 
his orders, but to their own impulse. The whole army— 
French, Germans, Italians, and Poles—hungry, tattered, worn 
out by the marches they had made, felt, as they stood face to 
face with this other army stopping their way, that “the cork 
was out and the wine must be drunk." If Napoleon had 
forbidden them to fight the Russians they would have murdered 
him and have fought afterwards, for it had become inevitable. 

When Napoleon's address was read to the troops, promising 
them as a compensation for suffering and death, that posterity 
would say of them that “they too were at that great battle,” 
they had shouted “Vive l'Empereur |" as they had done just 
before in front of the picture of the child playing cup and ball 
with the world—as they had done at all the nonsense he had 
ever talked to them. They had in fact no choice but to shout, 
“Vive l'Empereur !” and then fight for the food and rest which, 
if they won the victory, awaited them at Moscow. They did 
not, then, kill their fellow-creatures by their master's orders; 
the battle was not of Napoleon's ordering, since none of his 
commands were carried out, and he did not know what was 
going on; hence the question as to whether Napoleon had a 
cold or no is of no more consequence to history than the cold 
of the rawest recruit. 

Historians also ascribe to this legendary cold the weakness of 
his arrangements; while we, on the contrary, think the plan 
was a better one than those by which he had won many another 
battle; they only seem weaker on looking back because Boro- 
dino was the first action in which Napoleon was repulsed. The 
most learned and ingenious schemes always seem bad and give 
rise to the severest strictures when they have not resulted in 
victory, and vice versa. Weirother’s plans of action at Auster- 
litz, for instance, were a model of exactitude, and yet they were 
criticised for this very exactitude and minuteness. 

Napoleon played his part as representative of absolute power 
quite as well at Borodino as at his other battles—perhaps 
better. He had kept within the limits of strict sagacity. No 
confusion or contradiction can be imputed to him; he did not 


99 


WAR AND PEACE 


lose his head; he did not quit the field of action; and his tact 
and great experience helped him to fill the part of supreme 
ruler, as it seemed, in this bloody tragedy, with calmness and 
dignity. 


CHAPTER XI 


NAPOLEON was thoughtful as he returned from his tour of 
inspection. “The pieces are on the board," said he to himself. 
“To-morrow we play the game.” He called for a glass of 
punch, and then sent for Beausset to discuss certain alterations 
to be made in the empress’s household; and he astonished the 
courtier by his accurate recollection of the smallest details of 
the court at home. 

He took an interest in all sorts of trifles, and laughed at 
Beausset for his love of travelling, chatting with cool ease as 
a great surgeon might as he turns up his cuffs and ties on his 
apron while the patient is bound to the operating table: “This 
business is my affair," he seemed to imply. “All the wires are 
in my hands. When it is necessary to act I shall do it better 
than anyone—for the present I like to amuse myself. The 
more I laugh and the cooler I am, the more confident and 
hopeful you may feel; and the more you ought to wonder at 
my genius. 

After a second glass of punch he went to lie down; the 
anticipation of the morrow would not allow him to sleep, and 
though the evening damp had increased his cold, he got up at 
about three in the morning, and went into the outer room of 
the tent, which he used as his drawing-room, blowing his nose 
noisily. He asked whether the Russians were still in position, 
and was told that the enemy's fires were burning on the same 
spot. The aide-de-camp on duty came in. 

" Well, Rapp, do you think we shall make a good job of it 
to-day?" 

“Not a doubt of it, sire.” 

The emperor looked at him. 

“Do you recollect, sire, what you did me the honour to say 
to me at Smolensk: ‘The cork is drawn and the wine must be 
drunk.’ ” 

Napoleon frowned and was silent. 

“My poor army!” he said after a pause. “It has greatly 
diminished since Smolensk. Fortune is a fickle hussy, Rapp; 


34 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


I always said so, and now I am learning it by experience. But 
the Guards—the Guards are complete are they not?" 

“Yes, sire." 

Napoleon put a lozenge into his mouth and then looked at 
his watch; he was not sleepy, and it would not be morning yet 
awhile; there were no orders to give to kill the time; every- 
thing was ready. 

“Have the regiments of Guards had their biscuits given 
out?” 

f Y es; sires’? 

* And rice?" 

Rapp said that he himself had delivered the emperor's orders 
to that end, but Napoleon was not satisfied and shook his head: 
he seemed to doubt whether the order had been carried out. 
A valet brought some more punch and Napoleon ordered a 
glass for the aide-de-camp; as he sipped it he said: "I can 
neither taste nor smell; this cold is intolerable, and doctors 
and medicine are preached at me, when they cannot even cure 
me of a cold! Corvisart has given me some lozenges, but they 
do me no good! The fact is they do not know how to treat 
everything, and they never will Our body is just a living 
machine. That is what it is made for and that is its nature. 
Leave life to take care of itself, and it will fight its own battles 
a great deal better than if you paralyse its powers by weighting 
it with remedies. Our body is like a good watch, made to go 
a certain time; but no watchmaker can open it; he can only 
treat it blindfold and feeling his way. Our body is a living 
machine, neither more nor less." 

Having started on definitions, for which he had a great 
weakness, he went on suddenly: 

*Do you know what the art of war is? It is the talent of 
being stronger than the enemy at a given moment." 

Rapp made no answer. 

“To-morrow we shall have Koutouzow to deal with. He 
commanded at Braunau; do you remember? And for three 
weeks he has not once got on horseback to inspect his defences! 
Well, we shall see.” 

Again he looked at his watch: it was only four o'clock. He 
did not feel like sleeping; the punch was finished and still there 
was nothing to do. He rose, walked up and down, put on a 
greatcoat and went out. It was a dark night; a thin fog filled 
the air. The bivouac fires of the Guards were hardly visible 
through the smoke; those of the Russian outposts glimmered in 


35 


WAR AND PEACE 


the distance. All was still: nothing could be heard but the 
hollow tramp of the French troops making ready to march down 
to their positions. Napoleon went forward, studying the fires 
and listening to the growing noise; as he passed a tall guardsman, 
on guard in front of the imperial tent—who stood upright and 
motionless as a pillar on seeing his majesty—he stopped to 
speak to him. 

“How many years have you served?" he asked, with the 
kindly, military bluntness which he affected in addressing his 
soldiers. “Ah! one of the old ones I see! And the rice? 
Has it been served out?” 

* Yes, your majesty.” 

Napoleon nodded and walked on. 

At half-past five he mounted his horse and rode towards 
Schevardino. Dawn was growing from grey to white, the sky 
brightening rapidly; one cloud hung over the east. The 
deserted fires were dying out in the pale daylight. Then, to 
the right, one deep, rolling cannon-shot rang out and died away 
into silence again. Soon a second and a third rent the air, then 
a fourth and fifth echoed the knell from some nearer spot on the 
right. Their growl had not died away when a fiercer roar took 
it up on all sides. Napoleon and his suite made their way to 
Schevardino and dismounted—the action had begun. 


CHAPTER XII 


WHEN Peter returned to Gorky after his visit to Prince Andrew, 
he desired his servant to have his horses ready saddled and to 
wake him at daybreak; then he went soundly to sleep in the 
corner that Boris had so obligingly offered him. When he 
awoke the cottage was empty, the little panes in the windows 
were trembling, and his man was shaking him to rouse him. 

“Excellency, excellency!” the servant kept on obstinately 
repeating, looking away and shaking Peter by the shoulder, 
seemingly having lost all hope of ever waking him. 

“ Why—what is the matter? Is it begun?” 

“Listen to the cannonade," said the man, who was an old 
soldier. “They have all been gone a long time; even his 
highness.” 

Peter hastily dressed and ran out. It was a brilliant, delicious 
morning, dew-drops sparkled everywhere; the sun sent level 


36 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


rays through the curtain of cloud, and a shaft of light fell across 
the roof and through the hanging mist, on the dusty road just 
moist with the dew, on the walls of the houses, the rough wood 
palings, and the horses standing saddled at the door. The roar 
of the cannon grew louder and louder. 

* Make haste, count, if you want to be in time!” shouted an 
aide-de-camp as he galloped past. 

Peter started on foot, his man leading the horses, and made 
his way by the road as far as the knoll from whence he had 
surveyed the field the day before. This mamelon was crowded 
with military ; the staff-officers could be heard talking French, 
and conspicuous among them all was Koutouzow's grey head 
under a white cap bound with red, his fat neck sunk in his broad 
shoulders. He was studying the distance through a field-glass. 

As he climbed the slope Peter was struck by the scene that 
spread before him. It was the same landscape that he had 
seen yesterday, but swarming now with an imposing mass of 
troops, wrapped in wreaths of smoke and lighted up by the low 
sun which was rising on the left and filling the pure upper air 
with quivering rose and gold, while on the earth lay long masses 
of black shadow. The clumps of trees that bordered the horizon 
might have been hewn out of some sparkling yellow-green gem, 
and beyond them again, far away, the Smolensk road could 
be made out, covered with troops. Close to the knoll the 
golden fields and dewy slopes were bathed in shimmering 
light, and everywhere to the right and left were soldiers and 
still soldiers. It was animated, grandiose and unexpected; 
but what especially interested Peter was the actual field of 
battle—Borodino and the valley of the Kolotcha through which 
the river ran. 

Above the stream, over Borodino, just where the Voina 
makes its way through vast marshes to join the Kolotcha, rose 
one of those mists which, melting and dissolving before the 
sun's rays, gives an enchanted aspect and colour to the land- 
scape it transforms rather than hides. 

The morning light glowed on this mist, and in the smoke 
which mixed with it here and there, and sparkled on the water, 
the dew, the bayonets, even on Borodino. Through that trans- 
parent veil could be seen the white church, the hovel roofs of 
the village, and on every side serried masses of soldiers, green 
caissons and guns. From the valley, from the heights, and the 
slopes, from the woods, from the fields, came cannon-shots, 
now singly, now in volleys, followed by puffs of smoke which 


57 


WAR AND PEACE 


wreathed, mingled, and faded away. And strange as it may 
appear, this smoke and cannonade were the most attractive 
features of the spectacle. Puff! and a tight round cloud of 
smoke changing from violet to grey, to milky-white, would be 
seen, and—boom! a second later one would hear the sound; 
puff, puff! two smokes would rise jostling each other and then 
blending into each other, and—boom, boom!—sound would 
confirm what the eye had seen. Peter turned to look at the first 
cloud of smoke, which he had left as a firm round ball, and 
already in place of it were balloons of smoke drifting aside; and 
“puff” (a pause) “puff, puff!” three or four more would rise, 
and to each one with the same pauses “boom, boom, boom” 
answered a full, firm, fine sound. Sometimes it seemed as if 
these smokes moved, and at others as if they were stationary 
and the forests, fields and shining bayonets moved past them. 
To the left over the fields and bushes, they were constantly 
appearing, these large puffs of smoke with their majestic echoes, 
and nearer in the lower ground and in the woods, smaller and 
more frequent puffs of musket smoke with no time to form 
into balloon-shapes flashed out, giving also place to smaller 
echo. Tra-ta-ta-ta-ta rattled the muskets, frequently but 
irregularly, and thinly, compared to the rich noise of the big guns. 
Peter was chafing to be there among the smoke, and the sparkling 
bayonets, in the midst of the movement, close to the guns. 

He turned to compare his own feelings with those which 
Koutouzow and his staff might be expected to feel at such a 
moment, and found on every face that suppressed excitement 
which he had noticed before, but which he had not understood 
until after his conversation with Prince Andrew. 

“Go, my friend, go,” said Koutouzow to a general standing 
near him, *and God go with you." And the general who had 
taken the order went past Peter down the hill. 

“To the bridge!" he answered in reply to a question from 
another officer. 

“And I, too," thought Peter, following him. The general 
mounted his horse which a Cossack was holding, and Peter, 
going up to his servant, asked which of his two steeds was the 
quietest to ride. Then, clutching the beast's mane, leaning 
over his neck and clinging on by his heels, off he started. He 
felt that his spectacles were going; however, as he would not, 
and indeed could not, leave go of the bridle or the mane, away 
he went after the general, past the rest of the officers who gazed 
at him with amusement. 


38 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


CHAPTER XII 


THE general led the way down the hill and turned off sharp 
to the left; Peter lost sight of him and found himself riding 
through the ranks of an infantry regiment; he tried in vain to 
get out of the midst of the men, who surrounded him on all 
sides and looked with angry surprise at this fat man in a white 
hat, who was knocking them about so heedlessly, and at such a 
critical moment. 

“Why the devil do you ride through a battalion?” asked 
one; and another gave the horse a prod with the butt-end of 
his musket. Peter, clutching the saddle-bow and holding in 
his frightened steed as best he might, was carried on at a furious 
speed, and presently found himself in an open space. In front 
of him was a bridge guarded by infantry firing briskly; without 
knowing it he had come down to the bridge between Gorky and 
Borodino which the French, after taking the village, had come 
down to attack On both sides of the river, and in the hay- 
fields he had seen from afar, soldiers were struggling frantically ; 
still Peter could not believe that he was witnessing the first act 
of a battle. He did not hear the bullets that were whistling 
about his ears, nor the balls that flew over his head; and it 
did not occur to him that the men on the other side of the river 
were the enemy, or that those who lay on the ground were 
wounded or killed. 

* What on earth is he doing in front of the line?" shouted 
a voice. “Left! left! turn to the left!” 

Peter turned to the right, and ran up against an aide-de- 
camp of General Raievsky's; the officer looked furious, and was 
about to abuse him roundly, when he recognised him. 

* What brings you here?" said he, and he rode away. 

Peter, with a vague suspicion that he was not wanted there, 
and fearing he might be in the way, galloped after him. 

“Ts it here? May I follow you?” he asked. 

* In a minute—wait a minute," said his friend, tearing down 
into the meadows to meet a burly colonel to whom he was 
carrying orders. Then he came back to Peter. 

*'Tell me what on earth you have come here for? To look 
on I suppose?" 

“Just so," said Peter while the officer wheeled his horse 
round and was starting off again. 


39 


WAR AND PEACE 


“Here, it is not such warm work yet, thank God! but 
there, where Bagration is to the left, they are getting it hot.” 

“Really!” said Peter. “Where?” 

* Come up the hill with me; you will see very well from thence, 
and it is still bearable. Are you coming?” 

“After you," said Peter, looking round for his servant; 
then, for the first time, his eye fell on the wounded men who 
were dragging themselves to the rear, or being carried on 
litters; one poor little soldier, with his hat lying by his side, 
was stretched motionless on the field where the mown hay 
exhaled its stupefying scent. 

“Why have they left that poor fellow?” Peter was on the 
point of saying ; but the aide-de-camp's look of pain as he turned 
away stopped the question on his lips. As he could nowhere 
see his servant he rode on, across the flat as far as Raievsky’s 
battery; but his horse could not keep up with the officer's and 
shook him desperately. 

* You are not used to riding, I see," said the aide-de-camp. 

“Oh! it is nothing," said Peter, “his pace is bad.” 

“The poor beast has had his off leg wounded just above 
the knee—a bullet must have caught him there. Well, I 
congratulate you, count—it is your baptism of fire." 

After passing the Sixth Corps they got, through dense smoke, 
to the rear of the artillery, which held an advanced position and 
kept up an incessant and deafening fire. At last they found 
themselves in a little copse where the mild autumn air was 
clear of smoke. They dismounted and climbed the little hill. 

* [s the general here?" asked the aide-de-camp. 

“Just gone," was the answer. The officer turned to Peter; 
he did not know what to do with him. 

“Do not trouble yourself about me," said Bésoukhow. “I 
will go on to the top.” 

“Yes, do—and stay there; you will see everything and it is 
comparatively safe. I will come back for you." 

So they parted, and never again met, and only much later did 
Peter hear that the aide-de-camp had an arm shot off that day. 
He went up to the battery that held the famous knoll which came 
to be known to the Russians as the “ Mamelon battery or Raiev- 
sky's redoubt" ; and to the French—who regarded it as the key 
of the position—as “the great redoubt,” or “the fatal redoubt,”’ 
or the “centre redoubt.” At its foot fell tens of thousands. 

The works were thrown up on a mamelon surrounded with 
trenches on three sides. Ten heavy guns poured forth death 


40 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


through the embrasures of a breastwork, while other pieces, 
continuing the line, never paused in their fire. The infantry 
stood somewhat farther back. 

Peter had no suspition of the paramount value of this point, 
but supposed it to be, on the contrary, of quite secondary 
importance. He sat down on the edge of the earthwork that 
screened the battery and looked about with a smile of innocent 
satisfaction; now and then he got up to see what was going on, 
trying to keep out of the way of the men who were re-loading 
the guns and pushing them forward each time, and of those 
who went to and fro carrying the heavy cartridges. The guns 
of this battery kept up a constant fire, one after the other, 
deafening those near and clouding the surrounding country by 
their smoke. Quite unlike the infantry outside whose duty it 
was to protect the redoubt, the gunners standing on this speck 
of earth that was enclosed by its semicircle of trenches, and apart 
from the rest of the battle seemed bound together in a kind of 
fraternal responsibility ; and the appearance in their midst of a 
civilian like Peter was by no means pleasing to them. They 
looked at him askance and seemed almost alarmed at his pres- 
ence; a tall pock-marked artillery officer came close up to him 
and looked at him inquisitively, and a quite young lieutenant, 
rosy and baby-faced, who was in charge of two guns, turned 
round and said very severely: 

* You must have the goodness to go away, sir; you cannot 
remain here.” 

The gunners continued to shake their heads disapprovingly ; 
but when they saw that the man in a white hat did not get in 
the way, that he was content to sit still, or walk up and down 
in the face of the enemy’s fire, as coolly as if it were a boulevard, 
that he stood aside politely to make room for them with a shy 
smile—their ill-humour gave place to sympathetic cordiality, 
such as soldiers are apt to feel for the dogs, cocks, or other 
animals that march with the regiment. They adopted him, as 
it were, and laughing at him among themselves gave him the 
name of “our gentleman." 

A ball fell within a couple of yards of Peter, who only shook 
off the dust with which he was covered and smiled as he looked 
round. 

* And you are really not afraid, master?” asked a stalwart, 
red-faced artilleryman, showing his white teeth in a grin. 

* Well, are you afraid?" 

* Ah, but you know they will have no respect for you. If 


41 


WAR AND PEACE 


one of them knocks you down it will kick your inside out! 
How can you help being afraid?" he added with a laugh. 

Two or three more had stopped to look at Peter; they had 
jolly, friendly faces, and seemed quite astonished to hear him 
talk like themselves. 

“Tt is our business, master. But as for you, it is not at all 
the same thing, and it is wonderful . . ." 

*Now then—serve the guns!" cried the young lieutenant, 
who was evidently on duty of this kind for the first or second 
time in his life, he was so extravagantly anxious to be blame- 
less in his conduct to his chief and to his men. 

The continual thunder of guns and musketry grew louder 
and louder, especially on the left, round Bagration's advanced 
work; but Peter's attention was taken up with what was going 
on close to him, and the smoke prevented his seeing the progress 
of the action. His first impulse of gratified excitement had 
given way to a very different feeling, roused in the first instance 
by the sight of the little private in the hay-field. Seated on the 
earthwork he was now engrossed in watching the faces of those 
round him. It was scarcely ten o'clock yet; twenty men had 
been carried away from the battery, and two guns were silenced. 
The enemy's missiles fell thicker and faster, and spent balls 
dropped about them with a buzz and a thud. The artillerymen 
did not seem to heed them; they were full of jest and high 
spirits. 

“Look out my beauty! Not this way, try the infantry!” 
cried one man to a shell that spun across above their heads. 

“Yes, go to the infantry,” echoed a second; and he laughed 
as he saw the bomb explode among the foot soldiers. 

“Hallo! Is that an acquaintance of yours?” cried a third, 
to a peasant who bowed low as a ball came past. 

A knot of men had gathered close to the breastwork to look 
at something in the distance. 

"Do you see? the advanced posts are retiring, they are 
giving way!” said one. 

“Mind your own business,” cried an old sergeant. “If they 
are retiring it is because there is something for them to do 
elsewhere." He took one of them by the shoulders and shoved 
him forward with his knee. They all laughed. 

“Forward No 5!" was shouted from the other end. 

“A long pull and a pull all together!" answered the men 
who were serving the gun. 

“Hallo! That one nearly had ‘our gentleman’s’ hat off!” 


42 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


said a wag addressing Peter. “Ah! you brute!” he added as 
the ball hit the wheel of a gun-carriage and took off a man’s leg. 

“Here, you foxes!” cried another to the militiamen who 
had been charged with the duty of removing the wounded, and 
who now crept forward, bent almost double. “This is not 
quite the sauce you fancy!” 

“Look at those crows!” added a third to a party of the 
militia who had stopped short in their horror at the sight of 
the man who had lost his leg. 

Peter observed that every ball that hit, and every man that 
fell, added to the general excitement. The soldiers’ faces grew 
more fierce and more eager, as lightnings play round a thunder- 
cloud, and as though in defiance of that other storm that 
was raging around them. Peter felt that this glow was 
infectious. 

At ten o’clock the infantry sharpshooters, placed among the 
scrub in front of the battery, and along the Kamenka brook, 
began to give way; he could see them running and carrying 
the wounded on their gun-stocks. A general came up the 
mamelon, exchanged a few words with the colonel in command, 
shot a wrathful scowl at Peter, and went away again, after 
ordering the infantry men to fire lying down, so as to expose a 
smaller front. There was a sharp rattle of drums in the regi- 
ment below, and the line rushed forward. Peter’s attention was 
caught by the pale face of a young officer, who was marching 
with them backwards, holding his sword point downwards, and 
looking behind him uneasily; in a minute they were lost to 
sight in the smoke, and Peter only heard a confusion of cries, 
and the steady rattle of well-sustained firing. Then, in a 
few minutes, the wounded were brought out of the mélée on 
stretchers. 

In the redoubt projectiles were falling like hail, and several 
men were laid low; the soldiers were working with increased 
energy; no one heeded Peter. Once or twice he was told to 
get out of the way, and the old commanding officer walked 
up and down from one gun to another, with his brows knit. The 
boy lieutenant, with flaming cheeks, was giving his orders more 
incisively than ever; the gunners brought up the cartridges, 
loaded and fired with passionate celerity and zeal. They no 
longer walked; they sprang about as if they were moved by 
springs. The thundercloud was close overhead. Every face 
seemed to flash fire, and Peter, now standing by the old colonel, 
felt as if the explosion was at hand; then the young lieutenant 


43 


WAR AND PEACE 


came up to the chief, and saluted with his hand to the peak of 
his cap. 

“I have the honour to inform you that there are only eight 
rounds left. Must we go on?" 

* Grape-shot!" cried the colonel, instead of answering him; 
and at the moment the little lieutenant gave a cry, and dropped 
like a bird shot on the wing. 

Everything whirled and swam before Peter's eyes. A rain 
of ball was clattering on the breastwork, the men, and the guns. 
Peter, who had not thought much about it hitherto, now heard 
nothing else. On the right some soldiers were running and 
shouting Hurrah!—but backwards, surely, not forwards. A 
ball hit the earthwork close to where he was standing, and 
made the dust fly: at the same instant a black object seemed 
to leap up and bury itself in something soft. The militiamen 
made the best of their way down the slope again. 

* Grape-shot!" repeated the old commander. A sergeant in 
much agitation ran to him and told him, in terrified under- 
tones, that the ammunition was all spent. He might have 
been a house-steward telling his master that wine had run short. 

* Rascals! what are they about?" cried the officer; he looked 
round at Peter; his heated face streaming with perspiration, 
and his eyes flashing with a fever of excitement. “Run down 
to the reserve, and fetch up a caisson," he added furiously to 
one of the soldiers. 

“T will go," said Peter. 

The officer did not answer, but stepped aside. “ Wait— 
don't fire!” 

The man who had been ordered to fetch up the caisson ran 
against Peter. 

“It is not your place, master!" he said; and he set off as 
fast as he could go, down the slope. Peter ran after him, 
taking care to avoid the spot where the boy lieutenant was 
lying. Two, three, balls flew over his head, and fell close to 
him. 

* Where am I going?" he suddenly asked himself, when he 
was within a few feet of the ammunition stores. He stopped, 
not knowing where to go. At the same instant a tremendous 
shock flung him face downwards on the ground, a sheet of 
flame blinded him, and a terrific shriek ending in an explosion 
and rattle all round him, completely stunned him. When he 
presently recovered his senses, he was lying on the ground with 
his arms spread out. The caisson he had before seen had 


44 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


vanished ; in its place the scorched grass was strewn with green 
boards, half-burnt up, and with rags of clothing; one horse, 
shaking off the remains of his shafts, started away at a gallop; 
his mate, mortally injured, lay whinnying piteously. 


CHAPTER XIV 


PETER, half crazy with terror, started to his feet, and ran 
back to the battery, as being the only place where he could 
find shelter from all these catastrophes. As he went he was 
surprised to hear no more firing, and to find the work occupied 
by a number of new-comers, whom he could not recognise. 
The colonel was leaning over the breastwork, as though he 
were looking down at something, and a soldier, struggling in 
the hands of some others, was shouting for help. He had not 
had time to understand that the commanding officer was dead, 
and the soldier a prisoner, when another was killed under his 
eyes by a bayonet thrust in the back. Indeed he had scarcely 
set foot in the redoubt, when a man in a dark-blue uniform, 
with a lean, brown face, threw himself on him, sword in hand. 
Peter instinctively dodged and seized his assailant by the neck 
and shoulder. It was a French officer; but he dropped his 
sword, and took Peter by the collar. They stood for a few 
seconds face to face, each looking more astonished than the 
other at what he had just done. 

* Am I his prisoner, or is he mine?” was the question in 
both their minds. 

The Frenchman was inclined to accept the first alternative, 
for Peter's powerful hand was tightening its clutch on his 
throat. He seemed to be trying to speak, when a ball came 
singing close over their heads, and Peter almost thought it 
had carried off his prisoner's, he ducked it with such amazing 
promptitude. He himself did the same, and let go. The 
Frenchman, being no longer curious to settle which was the 
other's prize, fled into the battery, while Peter made off down 
the hill, stumbling over the dead and wounded, and fancying 
in his panic that they clutched at his garments. 

As he got to the bottom he met a dense mass of Russians, 
running as if they were flying from the foe, but all rushing 
towards the battery. This was the attack for which Yermolow 
took all the credit, declaring to all who would listen to him 


45 


WAR AND PEACE 


that his good star and daring alone could have carried it 
through. He pretended that he had had his pockets full of 
crosses of St. George, which he had strewn all over the mameion. 
The French, who had captured the redoubt, now in their turn 
fled, and the Russians pursued them with such desperate 
determination, that it was impossible to stop them. 

The prisoners were led away from the spot; among them 
was a wounded general, who was at once surrounded by Russian 
officers. Hundreds of wounded, French and Russians, their 
faces drawn with anguish, were carried off the mamelon, or 
dragged themselves away. Once more Peter went up; but 
those who had been his friends there were gone; he found only 
a heap of slain, for the most part unknown to him, though he 
saw the young lieutenant still in the same place by the earth- 
work, sunk in a heap in a pool of blood; the ruddy-faced gunner 
still moved convulsively, but was too far gone to be carried away. 
Peter fairly took to his heels: “They must surely leave off now,” 
he thought. “They must be horrified at what they have done.” 
And he mechanically followed in the wake of the procession of 
litters which were quitting the field of action. 

The sun, shrouded in the cloud of smoke, was still high 
above the horizon. Away to the left, and particularly round 
Séménovski, a confused mass swayed and struggled in the 
distance, and the steady roar of cannon and musketry, far from 
diminishing, swelled louder and louder; it was like the wild 
despairing effort of a man who collects all his strength for a 
last furious cry. 


CHAPTER XV 


THE principal scene of action had been over a space of about 
two versts, lying between Borodino and the advanced works 
held by Bagration. Beyond this radius the cavalry of Ouvarow 
had made a short diversion in the middle of the day, and behind 
Outitza Poniatowski and Toutchkow had come to blows; but 
these were relatively trifling episodes. It was on the plain, 
between the village and Bagration’s entrenchment, a tract of 
open ground almost clear of copse or brushwood, that the real 
engagement was fought, and in the simplest way. The signal 
to begin was given on each side by the firing of several hundred 
cannon. Then, as the smoke rolled down in a thick cloud, the 


46 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


divisions under Desaix and Compans attacked Bagration, while 
the viceroy’s marched on Borodino. It was about a verst! 
from Bagration's position to Schevardino, where Napoleon 
had posted himself; and more than two, as the crow flies, from 
those advanced works to Borodino. Napoleon could not there- 
fore be aware of what was going on there, for the whole valley 
was shrouded in smoke. Desaix’s men were invisible as soon 
as they got into the hollow, and when they had once dis- 
appeared they could be seen no more, as the opposite slope 
was hidden from view. Here and there a black mass, or a few 
bayonets, might be seen; stili, from the redoubt at Schevardino 
no one could be certain whether the hostile armies were moving 
or standing still. The slanting rays of a glorious sun lighted 
up Napoleon's face, and he screened his eyes with his hand 
to examine the defences opposite. Shouts rose now and then 
above the rattle of musketry, but the smoke thickened and 
curtained everything from view. Napoleon, standing on the 
hillock, looked through a telescope, and in the little circle of the 
spy-glass saw smoke and moving people—now his own men, now 
Russians; but where it all was when he looked again with the 
bare eye he could not tell. He went down from the eminence 
and walked up and down, stopping now and then to listen to the 
artillery, and looking at the field of battle; but neither from 
where he stood, nor from the knoll—where he had left his 
generals—nor from the entrenchments, which had fallen into 
the hands of the French and the Russians alternately, could 
anything that was happening be discovered. For several hours 
in succession, now the French came into view and now the 
Russians—now the infantry, and now the cavalry, they seemed 
to surge up, to fall, struggle, jostle, and then, not knowing what 
to do shouted and ran forwards or backwards. Napoleon’s 
aides-de-camp, the orderly officers of his marshals, rode up every 
few minutes to report progress ; but these reports were necessarily 
fictitious because, in the turmoil and fire, it was impossible to 
know exactly how matters stood, and because most of the 
aides-de-camp were content to repeat what was told them, 
without going themselves to the scene of action; because, too, 
during the few minutes that it took them to ride back again, 
everything changed, and what had been true was then false. 
Thus, one of the viceroy's aides-de-camp flew to tell the emperor 
that Borodino was taken, that the bridge over the Kolotcha 
was held by the French, and to ask Napoleon whether troops 
1 Two-thirds of a mile. 


47 


WAR AND PEACE 


should be made to cross it or no. Napoleon’s commands were 
to form in line on the other side and wait; but even while he 
was giving this order, and at the very time when the aide-de- 
camp was leaving Borodino, the bridge had been recaptured and 
burnt by the Russians in the conflict with which Peter had got 
mixed up at the beginning of the engagement. Another aide-de- 
camp came riding up, with a scared face, to say that the attack 
on the advanced works had been repulsed, that Compans was 
wounded, and Davoust killed; while in fact, the entrenchments 
had been recaptured by fresh troops, and Davoust had only 
been bruised. 

As the outcome of these reports, which were inevitably 
inaccurate by the mere force of circumstances, Napoleon made 
fresh arrangements, which, if they had not been anticipated by 
prompt action on the spot, must have come too late. The 
marshals and generals in command, who were nearer to the 
struggle than he was, and who now and then exposed them- 
selves to fire, took steps without waiting to refer to the emperor, 
directed the artillery, and brought up the cavalry on this side 
or the infantry on that.. Often, however, their orders were 
only half-executed, or not heeded at all. The ranks that 
were ordered to advance flinched and turned tail as soon as 
they smelt grape-shot; those who ought to have stood firm, 
fled or rushed on as they saw the foe rise up before them; and 
the cavalry, again, would bolt off to catch the Russian fugitives. 
In this way two regiments of cavalry charged across the ravine 
of Séménovski, dashed up the hill, turned right round and 
pelted back again, while the infantry performed much the same 
feat, allowing itself to be completely carried away. Hence all 
the decisions necessitated by the events of the moment were 
taken by those in immediate command, without waiting for 
orders from Ney, Davoust, or Murat—much less from Napoleon. 
They did not hesitate, indeed, to take the responsibility, since, 
during the struggle, a man’s sole idea is to escape with his 
life, and in seeking his own safety he rushes forward or back, 
and acts under the immediate influence of his own personal 
excitement. 

On the whole, after all, these various movements resulting 
from mere chance neither helped, nor even altered, the attitude 
of the troops. Their attacks and blows did little harm: it was 
the round shot and shell flying across the wide plain that brought 
death and wounds. As soon as the men were out of range 
of the cannon their leaders had them in hand, formed them 


48 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


into line, brought them under discipline; and, by sheer force 
of that discipline, led them back into the ring of iron and fire, 
where they again lost their presence of mind, and fled headlong, 
dragging one another into the stampede. 


CHAPTER XVI 


Davoust, Murat, and Ney had led forward their troops under 
fire again and again, in enormous masses and in perfect order, 
but instead of seeing the enemy take to flight, as in so many 
previous battles, these disciplined troops turned back disbanded 
and panic-stricken; in vain they re-formed their ranks, their 
numbers perceptibly dwindled. About noon Murat sent a 
message to Napoleon to ask for reinforcements. Napoleon was 
sitting at the foot of the knoll drinking punch. When the 
aide-de-camp came up and said the Russians could certainly be 
routed if his majesty would send a reinforcement, Napoloen 
looked stern and astonished: 

“Reinforcements?” he cried, as if he did not understand 
the meaning of the request, and he looked up at the handsome 
lad with long black hair, curled in imitation of Murat. “ Rein- 
forcements!” he repeated to himself in an undertone. ‘What 
more can they want of me when they have half of the army at 
their disposal in front of the Russian left wing which has not 
even an entrenchment? Tell the King of Naples that it is not 
yet noon, and I do not see my way on the chessboard. Go.” 
The handsome young fellow sighed, and with his hand still up 
to his shako rode back into the fire. Napoleon rose and called 
Caulaincourt and Berthier, with whom he discussed various 
matters not relating to the battle. In the middle of the conver- 
sation Berthier's attention was attracted by seeing a general 
riding a horse covered with foam, and coming towards the 
mamelon with his staff. This was Belliard. He dismounted, 
and hastening towards the emperor, explained to him, in loud 
and positive tones, that the reinforcements must be sent up. 
He swore on his honour that the Russians would be utterly 
cut up if the emperor would only send forward one division. 
Napoleon shrugged his shoulders and said nothing, still walking 
up and down, while Belliard vehemently expressed his opinions 
to the generals who stood round him. 

* Belliard, you are too hot-headed," said Napoleon. “It is 


49 


WAR AND PEACE 


so easy to make a mistake in the thick of the fray. Go back, 
look again, and then return!” 

Belliard had hardly disappeared, when another messenger 
arrived from the scene of action. 

* Well, what now?” said Napoleon, in the tone of a man 
irritated by constant importunities. 

* Your majesty, the prince . . .” 

* Wants reinforcements, I suppose?" interrupted Napoleon 
with an angry gesture. 

The aide-de-camp bowed affirmatively. Napoleon turned 
away, went forward a step or two, turned back, and addressed 
Berthier. 

*We must send them the reserves—what do you think? 
Whom can we send to help? ” he said, addressing Berthier—“ that 
gosling whom I have made into an eagle," as he called him later. 

“Let us send Claparéde's division, sire," replied Berthier, 
who knew every division, regiment, and battalion by name. 

The emperor nodded approval; the aide-de-camp went off 
at a gallop towards Claparéde's division, and a few minutes 
later the regiment known as the Jeune Garde (in contradis- 
tinction to the Vieille Garde), which stood in reserve behind the 
mamelon, began to move forward. Napoleon stood looking at it. 

“No,” he said suddenly, “I cannot send Claparéde—send 
Friant.” 

Though there was nothing to be gained by moving the second 
rather than the first, and in fact, the immediate result was 
great delay, this order was carried out exactly. Napoleon 
though he little suspected it, was dealing with his army like a 
doctor, who impedes the course of nature by the application of 
remedies: a method he was always ready to criticise severely in 
others. Friant’s division was soon lost to sight in the smoke, 
with the rest, while aides-de-camp came in from every point 
of the action, as if they had conspired to make the same demand. 
All reported that the Russians stood firm in their positions, and 
were keeping up a terrific fire under which the French were 
fairly melting away. Napoleon continued to sit in a brown 
study in his folding chair. Monsieur de Beausset, who was still 
fasting, went up to the emperor, and respectfully suggested 
breakfast. 

“I fancy I may congratulate your majesty on a victory?” 
he said. 

Napoleon shook his head. Monsieur de Beausset, thinking 
that his negative referred to the assumed victory, took the 


50 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


liberty of remarking, in a half-jesting tone, that there could be 
no mortal reason against their having some breakfast as soon 
as it might be possible. 

“Go to...’ Napoleon suddenly began angrily and he 
turned away. 

A smile of pity and dejection was Beausset’s comment, as he 
left the emperor and joined the officers. 

Napoleon was going through the painful experience of a 
gambler who, after a long run of luck, has calculated every 
chance and staked handfuls of gold—and then finds himself 
beaten after all, just because he has played too elaborately. 
The troops and commanders were the same as of old; his plans 
well laid; his address short and vigorous; he was sure of him- 
self, and of his experience, his genius which had ripened with 
years; the enemy in front was the same as at Austerlitz and 
Friedland; he had counted on falling on him tooth and nail— 
and the stroke had failed as if by magic. He was wont to see 
his designs crowned with success. To-day, as usual, he had 
concentrated his fire on a single point, had thrown forward his 
reserves and his cavalry—men of steel—io break through the 
Russian lines, and yet victory held aloof. From all sides came 
the cry for reinforcements, the news that generals were killed 
or wounded, that the regiments were demoralised, that it was 
impossible to move the Russians. On other occasions, after two 
or three moves, and two or three orders hastily given, aides-de- 
camp and marshals had come to him beaming, to announce 
with compliments and congratulations that whole corps had 
been taken prisoners, to bring in sheaves of standards and eagles 
taken from the foe; trains of cannon had rattled up behind 
them, and Murat had asked leave to charge the baggage-wagons 
with cavalry! This was how things had gone at Lodi, at 
Marengo, at Arcola, at Jena, at Austerlitz,at Wagram. To-day 
something strange was in the air—the Russian advanced works, 
to be sure, had been taken by storm—still, he felt it, and he 
knew that all his staff felt it too. Every face was gloomy; each 
man avoided catching his neighbour’s eye; only Beausset alone 
did not perhaps understand what was happening and Napoleon 
himself knew better than anyone what was the meaning of a 
struggle that had lasted eight hours and had not yet resulted in 
victory, though all his forces had been engaged. He knew that 
it was a drawn game, and that even now the smallest turn of 
fortune might, at this critical moment, involve him and his 
army in ruin. 


51 


WAR AND PEACE 


As he thought over this weird campaign in Russia—in which, 
during two months’ fighting, not a battle had been won, not a 
flag, not a gun, not a company of men had been captured—the 
dismal faces of his courtiers, and their lamentations over the 
obstinacy of the Russians, oppressed him like a nightmare. The 
Russians might at any moment fall on his left wing, or break 
through his centre. A spent ball might even hit him. All 
these things were possible. He had been used to look forward 
to none but happy chances; to-day, on the contrary, an endless 
series of chances, all against him, rose before his fancy. Yes, it 
was like a nightmare, in which, one sees somebody approaching 
with evil intent and strikes out with all one’s might, knowing 
that the blow must destroy, and then feels that the hand is help- 
less, that it falls limply like a rag, and all the horror of instant 
inevitable destruction seizes upon one. When he heard that 
the left wing was, in fact, attacked by the enemy, he was panic- 
stricken. Berthier came up and suggested that he should ride 
round and judge for himself of the state of affairs. 

“What? What did you say? Ah! yes, to be sure; call for 
my horse. . . .” And he started towards Séménovski. 

All along the road nothing was to be seen but horses and men. 
singly or in heaps, lying in pools of blood: neither Napoleon nor 
his generals had ever seen so many slain within so small a space. 
The hollow roar of the cannon, which had never ceased for ten 
hours, and of which the ear was weary, made a sinister accom- 
paniment to the scene. Having reached the height above 
Séménovski he could see in the distance, across the smoke, close 
lines of uniforms of unfamiliar colours: these were the Russians. 
They stood in compact masses behind the village and the knoll, 
and their guns still thundered unremittingly all along the line: it 
was not a battle; it was butchery, equally fruitless to both sides. 
Napoleon stopped and relapsed into the reverie from which 
Berthier had roused him. It was impossible to put an end to the 
slaughter, and yet he it was who, to the world, was the responsible 
authority; this first repulse brought home to him all the horror 
and waste of such massacres. 

One of the generals ventured to suggest that the Old Guard 
should be sent forward; Ney and Berthier exchanged glances 
and smiled in contempt for so preposterous a notion. Napoleon 
sat in silence, with his head down. 

“We are eight hundred leagues from home,” he suddenly 
exclaimed, “and I will not have my Guards cut to pieces!” 
Then turning his horse, he galloped back to Schevardino. 


52 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


CHAPTER XVII 


Kovrouzow, with his head bent and sunk all into a heap from 
his own weight, sat all day where Peter had seen him in the 
morning, on a bench covered with a rug; he gave no orders 
but merely approved or disapproved of what was suggested 
to him. 

“That is it—yes, yes, do so,” he would say, or; “Go and see, 
my good friend, go and see!” or, again: “That is of no use; we 
must wait... .” 

But he listened to all he was told, and gave the requisite 
orders without seeming to take any interest in what was said. 
But something else, something in the expression and tone of the 
speaker seemed to interest him. His long experience and hoary 
wisdom had taught him that no one man can direct the move- 
ments of a hundred thousand others, fighting for life and death. 
He knew that it was neither the plans of the commander, nor 
the placing of the troops, nor the number of guns, nor the amount 
of slain which decide the victory, but that imponderable force 
called the Spirit of the Army, which he tried to control and guide 
as far as possible. The calm, grave expression of his face was 
in startling contrast to the weakness of his aged frame. 

At eleven in the forenoon a messenger came to say that the 
redoubt taken by the French had been recaptured, but that 
Bagration was wounded. Koutouzow exclaimed loudly and 
shook his head. 

* Go and fetch up Prince Peter Ivanovitch,” he said to an 
aide-de-camp; then turning to the Prince of Wurtemberg he 
said: “Would your highness at once take the command of the 
Second Army?” 

The prince rode off, but before he reached the village of 
Séménovski he sent back his aide-de-camp to ask for reinforce- 
ments. Koutouzow frowned; then he sent Dokhtourow forward 
to take the command, instead of the prince, whom he begged 
to return, as he found that he could not dispense with his advice 
under such serious circumstances. When he was told that 
Murat had been taken prisoner he smiled; his staff eagerly 
congratulated him. 

* Wait a little, gentlemen," he said. “Wait. The battle is 
certainly ours, and the news that Murat is taken i IS not so very 
astonishing; but we must not crow too soon.’ 

However, he sent an aide-de-camp to make the fact known to 


55 


WAR AND PEACE 


the troops. Somewhat later Scherbinine arrived to tell him that 
the outworks at Séménovski had been taken once more by the 
French, and Koutouzow understood from the expression of his 
face, and the rumours that reached him from the scene of action, 
that things were going badly. He rose and led him away. 

* My good fellow,” he said to Yermolow “go and see what can 
be done." 

Koutouzow was at Gorky, the very centre of the Russian 
position; Napoleon's attack on the Russian left had been bravely 
repulsed, but in the centre his troops had not got beyond Boro- 
dino, and on his left flank Ouvarow's cavalry had made the 
French run. By three o'clock the French had given up attacking 
and Koutouzow could read acute excitement on the faces of 
those who came up from the field, as well as of those who re- 
mained with him. The success was far beyond his hopes, but 
his strength was beginning to fail; his head drooped, and he kept 
dropping asleep. Some dinner was brought to him; while he was 
eating, Woltzogen came to talk to him; it was he who had said in 
Prince Andrew's hearing that the war must have room to spread, 
and who was hated by Bagration. He had come by Barclay's 
request, to report progress as to the military operations of the 
left wing. The wiseacre Barclay, seeing a crowd of fugitives and 
wounded, while the farthest line had given way, had come to the 
conclusion that the battle was lost, and had sent off his favourite 
aide-de-camp to carry the news to Koutouzow. The com- 
mander-in-chief was munching a piece of roast fowl, and he 
looked complacently up at Woltzogen, who approached him with 
an air of indifference and a superficial smile, and saluted with 
affected grace; he looked as though he would convey: “I, as an 
experienced and distinguished soldier, may leave it to the 
Russians to offer incense to this useless old dotard, whom I 
know how to estimate at his true worth!" 

“The old gentleman" —the Germans always spoke 
of Koutouzow as “the old gentleman”—‘“is making himself 
comfortable!" thought Woltzogen, glancing at the plate; and 
he proceeded to report on the situation of the left flank as he had 
been desired, and as he himself had believed that he had seen it. 

" All the chief points of our position are in the enemy's hands; 
we cannot dislodge them for lack of men. Our troops are flying, 
and it is impossible to stop them." 

Koutouzow ceased eating, and looked up astonished; he 
seemed not to understand the words. Woltzogen saw that he 
was much moved and went on with a smile: 


54 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


“I do not think I should be justified in concealing from your 
highness what I saw. The troops are completely routed.” 

“You saw! you saw that?” cried Koutouzow, starting up 
with a fierce frown; with his trembling hands he gesticulated 
threats, and almost choking, exclaimed: 

“How dare you, sir, tell me such a thing as that? You know 
nothing about it! Go and tell your general that it is false and 
that I know the true state of things better than he does.” 

Woltzogen would have interrupted him, but Koutouzow went 
on: “The enemy’s left is driven back, and his right badly 
damaged. If you saw wrongly, that is no reason to tell a false- 
hood. Go and tell General Barclay that I intend to renew the 
attack to-morrow!” No one spoke; there was not a sound but 
the old man's hard breathing: “He is repulsed on all sides," he 
added, ‘‘and I thank God, and our brave troops! The victory 
is ours, and to-morrow we will cast him forth from the sacred soil 
of Russia.” He crossed himself, and ended with a sob. 

Woltzogen shrugged his shoulders and smiled sardonically. 
He turned on his heel, not even attempting to conceal his 
astonishment at “the old gentleman's" wilful blindness. At 
this moment another officer—a particularly pleasant-looking 
man, came up the hill. 

“ Ah! here is my hero!" said Koutouzow. 

This was Raievsky. He had been all day in the hottest place 
in the field. His report was that the Russians were holding their 
own, and that the French did not dare to renew the attack. 

“Then you do not think, as some others do, that we are forced 
to retire?" asked Koutouzow in French. 

“On the contrary, highness. Ina doubtful action the side that 
stands steady longest is the conqueror, and in my opinion . . ." 

“‘Kaissarow!” exclaimed the commander-in-chief, * make out 
the order of the day for me. And you,” he added to another 
officer, “ride down the lines and say that we attack to-morrow.” 

Meanwhile Woltzogen had been to Barclay and come back 
again, and he now said that his chief begged to have the orders he 
had carried confirmed by writing. Koutouzow, without even 
looking at him, at once had the order written out, which relieved 
the ex-commander-in-chief of all responsibility. 

By that mysterious moral intuition which is known as esprit de 
corps, Koutouzow’s order of the day was communicated instan- 
taneously to the furthest corner of the field. Not, of course, 
that the original words were exactly repeated ; in fact the expres- 
sions given to Koutouzow were not his at all; but everyone 


55 


WAR AND PEACE 


understood their purport and bearing. They were not the utter- 
ance, indeed, of a more or less skilful orator, but they perfectly 
expressed the feeling of the commander-in-chief—a sentiment 
that found an echo in the breast of every Russian. All these 
weary, doubting soldiers, when they were told that they were to 
attack the foe on the morrow, felt that what they wished to 
believe was really true; this comforted them and revived their 
courage. 


CHAPTER XVIII 


PRINCE ANDREW’S regiment was one of those kept in reserve and 
inactive till about two o’clock, behind Séménovski, under heavy 
fire. At that time, when the regiment had already lost more 
than 200 men, it was ordered forward on to the open ground 
between Séménovski and the mamelon battery. Thousands had 
fallen in the course of the day on this spot, on which the fire of 
some hundred of the enemy’s guns was now steadily directed. 
Without stirring an inch or firing a shot, the regiment was soon 
reduced by a third more. In front, and especially on the right, 
the cannon were thundering through a wall of smoke, and throw- 
ing out a hail of shot and shell without one instant of respite. 
From time to time the storm passed over their heads, the projec- 
tiles singing through the air; but then, again, several men were 
hit in the course of a few seconds—the dead were laid aside, and 
the wounded carried to the rear. Each explosion diminished the 
chances of life for the survivors. The regiment was drawn up in 
columns of battalions, three hundred paces in length; but, in 
spite of this length of line, all the men were equally and pain- 
fully impressed. They were all gloomy and silent; at most they 
spoke a few words in an undertone, and even those died on their 
lips as each ball took effect, and as they heard their comrades 
calling for the hospital men. 

The officers had given orders that the men should keep their 
ranks sitting on the ground. One was carefully tying and un- 
tying the runner in the lining of his cap; another, breaking up the 
dry clay into a powder, polished up his bayonet with it; a third 
loosened and buckled the straps of his bag; a fourth was dili- 
gently turning down his boot-tops, and pulling them on and off; 
some were scraping out a hollow shelter in the earth, and some 
aimlessly plaiting straws. They all seemed absorbed in their 
occupations, and when a comrade rolled over close by, wounded 


56 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


or dead—when the litters touched their heads—when through 
the rolling vapour they had a glimpse of the foe, no one took any 
notice; only if they saw the Russian artillery or cavalry move 
forward, or fancied the infantry were being marched about, 
remarks of approval were heard on all sides. Then, the 
moment after, all their attention was centred once more on trifles 
that had nothing to do with the drama going on around them. 
It was as if their moral force was exhausted, and had to be 
revived by a return to the details of daily life. An artillery train 
presently passed by; one of the horses harnessed to a caisson had 
got his leg caught in the traces. 

“Look out there, at one of your team—take care! He will be 
down! Have they no eyes!” was shouted on all sides. 

Again, the general attention was claimed by a small brown 
dog, which had come nobody knew whence, and trotted busily 
along the line with his tail steadily kept aloft. A ball fell close 
to him, and he ran off with a melancholy yelp, his tail between 
his legs, and the whole regiment roared with laughter. But 
such diversions only lasted a moment, and the men, whose 
anxious and pallid faces seemed to grow greyer and more 
pinched as time went on, sat there for eight hours, without 
food, and in the very jaws of death. 

Prince Andrew, as pale as his men, walked up and down the 
meadow from end to end, his head bent and his hands behind his 
back; everything that had to be done was carried out without 
any orders from him; the dead were removed, the wounded taken 
to the rear, and the ranks closed up. At the beginning of the day 
he had thought it his duty to encourage his men and walk down 
the ranks; but he soon saw that he could teach them nothing. 
All the energies of his soul, like those of every soldier there, were 
directed to keeping his thoughts off from the horrors of the 
situation. He dragged his feet over the trampled grass, looking 
mechanically at the dust on his boots; now and then, taking long 
strides, he tried to pace the ridges left by the mower’s scythe; 
then he would calculate how many went to a verst; or he would 
pull the tufts of wormwood that grew by the hedgerow, and bruise 
them in his fingers, and sniff the bitter wild perfume. All the 
thoughts of the previous evening had left no trace in his mind; 
in fact he was thinking of nothing, and listened wearily to the 
unceasing noise, always the same—the crackling of shells and 
musketry. Now and then he looked round at the foremost 
battalion: “Ah! here it comes—straight at us," he would say 
to himself, as he heard the sharp whistle of a ball through the 


57 


WAR AND PEACE 


smoke. “Here is another. Down it comes! No, it has passed 
overhead . . . There, that one has fallen!" and then he would 
count his paces once more—sixteen across to the edge of 
the meadow. 

Suddenly a ball flew past and buried itself in the earth, not 
five yards away. He shuddered involuntarily, and looked down 
the line; several men had no doubt been struck, for he saw a 
great bustle close to the second battalion. 

“Tell the men not to huddle together so much!” he said to 
an aide-de-camp. 

The order was transmitted, and the aide-de-camp came back 
to Prince Andrew at the very moment when the major rode up 
on the other side. 

*Look out!" cried a terrified soldier, and a shell came flying 
down like a bird alighting on the ground, whizzing and shrieking, 
just at the feet of the major's horse, and not two yards from 
Prince Andrew. The horse did not pause to consider whether or 
no it were dignified to betray his fear; he reared, neighing with 
alarm, and flung himself on one side, almost throwing his rider. 

“Lie down!" shouted the aide-de-camp. 

But Prince Andrew stood still, doubting; the shell spun round 
like an enormous top, the fuse smoking and fizzing, close to a 
shrub of wormwood between himself and the aide-de-camp. 

“Can this really mean death?” thought he, looking with a 
vague feeling of regret at the wormwood plant, and the black 
whirling object. “I do not want to die—I like life, I like this 
earth. . . ." These were the words in his mind, and yet he 
understood only too well what it was that he saw. 

" Aide-de-camp," he began, “I should be ashamed . . ." 

But the sentence was never finished. There was a tremendous 
explosion followed by a strange clatter like that of smashing 
glass; a fountain of fire leapt into the air, and fell as a shower 
of iron; the air was full of the smell of gunpowder. Prince 
Andrew was jerked forward with his arms out, and fell heavily 
on his face. Some officers rushed up; on his right there was a 
pool of blood; the militiamen were called to help, but waited 
behind the group of officers; Prince Andrew lay with his face in 
the grass, breathing hard. 

"Come on—come!”’ said someone. The peasants drew near, 
and lifted him by the head and feet ; he groaned—the men looked 
at each other, and laid him down again. 

“Pick him up; it must be done!" said another. 

They raised him once more and got him on to a stretcher. 


58 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


“Good God! what has happened? In the stomach? Then he 
is done for!" said the officers. 

“Tt actually grazed my ear!” said the aide-de-camp. 

The bearers went off quickly along a path they had kept open 
to the ambulance in the rear. 

“Keep step . . . you!” shouted an officer seizing the men by 
the shoulders and stopping the unevenly carried stretcher. 

*Eh, suit your step, Fedor" said the foremost man. 

“That’s better," beamed the man at the back having suc- 
ceeded in suiting his step to that of the man in front. 

“Excellency — my prince?” murmured Timokhine, in a 
tremulous voice, running by the stretcher. 

Prince Andrew opened his eyes and looked at the speaker; 
then he closed them again. 


Prince Andrew was carried into the wood where the ambulance 
carts stood, and the hospital tents, three in number, had been 
pitched close to a plantation of young birches. The horses were 
in harness, and very contentedly munching their oats, sparrows 
fluttered down to pick up the seeds they let drop, and crows, 
scenting blood, flew from tree to tree croaking impatiently All 
round the tents, sat, lay, or stood men in blood-stained uniforms; 
the litter-bearers crowded about them, and could hardly be per- 
suaded to move. They were staring at them with downcast 
looks ; deaf to the commands of the officers, they leaned over the 
wounded, wondering, as it seemed, what could be the meaning of 
this appalling spectacle. Inside the tents sobs of rage or pain 
might be heard, mingled with more plaintive groans; now and 
then a surgeon rushed out to fetch water, and pointed out which 
were to be taken in next of the wounded men who were waiting 
their turn—screaming, swearing, weeping, or clamouring for 
brandy. Some were already delirious. 

Prince Andrew, as a commanding officer, was carried through 
this crowd to the first tent, and his bearers paused for further 
orders. He opened his eyes, not understanding what was going 
on around him: the meadow, the wormwood shrub, the mowed 
field, the whirling black top, the sudden longing to live that had 
come over him—all recurred to his mind. Quite near him a tall 
and finely-built corporal was talking very loud, and attracting 
everybody’s attention; his black eyes shone from under a 
bandage which half-covered them, and he was propped up 
against the branch of a tree; he had been wounded in the head 
and in the foot. He had an eager audience. 


59 


WAR AND PEACE 


* We gave him such a dose of it that he made off, leaving every- 
thing behind! We took the king himself prisoner!" he was 
saying, his eyes sparkling brightly. 

* Ah! if the reserves had but come up, there would not have 
been a man of them left, I swear!" 

Prince Andrew heard too, and felt comforted. 

“But what can it matter to me now?” he thought. “What 
has happened to me? And why am I here? Why am I in 
such despair at the idea of dying? There is something in life 
after all that I have failed to understand.” 


CHAPTER XIX 


OnE of the surgeons, whose hands and apron were covered 
with blood, came out of the tent; he held a cigar between his 
thumb and his little finger in order to keep it from getting 
soiled. He looked up and away, over the heads of the wounded 
men; it was evident that he desperately wanted a moment of 
breathing time; but he almost immediately looked down at 
the scene at hand. He sighed and half-closed his eyes. 

“In a minute,” he replied, to an assistant who pointed out 
Prince Andrew, and he had him carried into the tent. 

There was a murmur among the rest of the victims. 

“Why, you might fancy these gentlemen were the only folks 
that have a right to live, even in the other world!” 

Prince Andrew was laid on an operating table that had but 
just been cleared; a surgeon was sponging it down. The prince 
could not clearly make out who was in the tent. The cries and 
moans on one hand, and the agonising pain he felt in his side, 
stomach and back, paralysed his faculties. Everything was 
mixed up in his mind into one single impression of naked, blood- 
stained flesh, filling the low tent; and that, again, was one with 
the scene he had witnessed, that scorching August day, in the 
pool on the Smolensk road. Yes, it was this very “chair a 
canon” which had then filled him with sickening and prophetic 
horror. 

There were three tables in the tent; two were occupied; Prince 
Andrew was placed on the third, and left to himself for a few 
minutes, during which he was at leisure to look at the other 
two. On the nearest, a Tartar was sitting up—a Cossack it 
seemed from the uniform that lay near him. Four soldiers 


60 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


were holding him, while a doctor in spectacles was probing 
under the swarthy skin of his muscular back. 

“Oh,” roared the Tartar, and suddenly raising his tanned 
face, with its wide forehead and flat nose, he gavea piercing 
yell, and flung himself from side to side to shake off the men 
who held him. 

The farther table was surrounded with people. A tall, 
strongly-built man was stretched upon it, his head thrown back; 
there was something familiar to Prince Andrew in the colour of 
his curling hair, and the shape of his head. Several hospital 
attendants were leaning on him with all their weight to keep him 
from stirring. One leg—fat and white—was constantly twitch- 
ing with a convulsive movement, and his whole body shook with 
violent and choking sobs. Two surgeons, one quite pale and 
tremulous, were busy over his other leg. 

Having finished operating on the Tartar, who was covered 
up in his cloak, the surgeon in spectacles wiping his hands 
came across to Prince Andrew; he glanced at him and turned 
away. 

“Take his clothes off! What are you thinking of?” he 
exclaimed angrily to one of his assistants. 

When Prince Andrew felt himself in the hands of the attendant 
who, with his sleeves turned back, hastily unbuttoned his 
uniform, all the memory of his childhood suddenly flashed upon 
his mind. The surgeon bent down, examined his wound, and 
sighed deeply; then he called another to help him, and the next 
instant Prince Andrew lost consciousness from the intense agony 
he suddenly felt. When he came to himself the pieces of his 
broken thigh, with the torn flesh still clinging to them, had been 
extracted from his wound and it had been dressed. He opened 
his eyes; water was being sprinkled on his face; the doctor bent 
over him, kissed him silently, and went away without looking 
back at him. 

After that fearful torture a feeling of indescribable comfort 
came over him. His fancy reverted to the happiest days of 
his infancy, especially to those hours when, after he had 
been undressed and put into his little bed, his old nurse had 
sung him to sleep. He was glad to be alive—that past 
seemed to have become the present. The surgeons were 
still busy over the man he had fancied he recognised; they 
were supporting him in their arms, and trying to soothe him. 

* Show it me—show it me!” he said; fairly crying with pain. 

Prince Andrew as he heard him felt ready to cry too. Was 


61 


WAR AND PEACE 


it because he was dying ingloriously, or because he regretted life? 
Was it by reason of these memories of his childhood? Or 
because he had suffered so acutely himself, that tears of pity rose 
to his eyes when he saw others suffer. 

They showed the other man his amputated leg, with the 
blood-stained boot still on it. ` 

“Oh!” he exclaimed, and wept as bitterly as a woman. 

Just then the doctor moved. “My God! What is this? 
Why is he here?” said Prince Andrew to himself. He could 
see that the miserable creature who lay sobbing and exhausted 
by his side, was Anatole Kouraguine. 

A hospital servant was lifting him, and holding a glass of 
water to the swollen and quivering lips that could not close on 
the rim. “Yes, certainly it is he—that man is bound to me by 
some painful association—but what is it?” He asked himself, ~ 
but could find no reply, till suddenly, like a vision from an ideal 
world of love and purity, Natacha seemed to stand before him; 
Natacha as he had first seen her at the ball in 1810, with her thin 
bust and arms, and her radiant, half-scared, enthusiastic face — 
and his own love and tenderness woke up, deeper, warmer than 
ever. Now he knew what the link was between himself and the 
man whose eyes, red and dim with tears, were fixed on him. 
Prince Andrew remembered everything, and tender pitifulness 
rose up in his heart which was full of peace. He could not con- 
trol those tears of compassion and charity which flowed for all 
humanity, for himself, for his own weakness, and for that of this 
hapless creature. “Yes,” said he to himself. “This is the 
pity, the charity, the love of my neighbour, the love of those 
that hate us as well as of those who love us, which God preached 
on earth, and which Maria used to talk about—but I did not 
understand it then. This was what I had yet to learn in 
this life and what makes me regret it. But now, I feel, it 
comes too late!” 


CHAPTER XX 


THE terrible sight of the battle-field strewn with corpses and 
wounded men, the crushing responsibility that weighed upon 
him, the news that reached him every few minutes of so many 
generals being killed or severely wounded, together with the 
loss of his prestige, all made an extraordinary impression on 
the Emperor Napoleon. He, who was usually glad to look on 


62 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


the dead and dying, and fancied that his callousness was a 
proof of his magnanimity and fortitude, felt morally defeated; 
and he hastened to quit the field of battle and return to Sche- 
vardino. His face was yellow and puffy, dull-eyed, with a red 
nose and his voice hoarse—seated on his camp-stool he could not 
help listening to the noise of the guns, but he did not raise his 
eyes. He was awaiting with agonised impatience the end of 
this business in which he had been the prime mover, and which 
he now was impotent to stay. For a moment, a natural and 
human impulse had risen superior to the mirage which had so 
long bewitched him, and for once he brought home to himself 
the keen apprehension of suffering that had come over him on 
the battle-field. He thought of the contingency for himself of 
death and anguish, and he ceased to long for Moscow, for glory, 
for conquest, he sighed but for one thing: rest, quiet, liberty. 
Nevertheless, when he had reached the height above Séménovski, 
and the general in command of the artillery proposed to bring 
up a few batteries to support the firing on the Russian troops 
drawn up in compact masses in front of Kniazkow, he had 
agreed at once, and desired to be informed of the result. Not 
long after an aide-de-camp came to tell him that two hundred 
cannon had been turned on the Russians, but that they held 
their own: “Our fire mows them down in rows and they do 
not stir!” 

“Do they want more?” asked Napoleon huskily. 

“Sire? . . ." said the aide-de-camp, who had not heard. 

“Do they want more?” repeated Napoleon. “Well, if they 
do, give it them." And so he came back into the false world 
of chimeras that he had created for himself, and (like a horse 
tethered to a rope fancies it is doing what it likes because it is 
free to run round as far as the rope will permit) resumed the 
painful, cruel and inhuman part that he was destined to fill. 

This man, who was no doubt more directly responsible than 
anyone else for the events of his time, was, till his dying day, 
disabled by his darkened intellect and conscience, from under- 
standing goodness, beauty, truth, and the real meaning of his 
actions, so contradictory were they to all goodness and truth, 
so far from anything human for him to understand it; and as 
half the world approved of these acts, he could not repudiate 
them without being illogical, and was forced therefore to re- 
pudiate all goodness, truth, and everything human. To-day 
was not the first time that he had felt a secret satisfaction at 
comparing the number of Russian corpses with the French; it 


63 


WAR AND PEACE 


was not the first time that he had written to Paris that the 
field of battle was a glorious sight. Why should he say this? 
Because there were 50,000 dead lying there; and even at St. 
Helena, where he spent his leisure in recording his past achieve- 
ments, ‘he could dictate as follows: 


“The war with Russia ought to have been the most popular 
war of modern times: it was on the side of good sense and 
sound interests, of the peace and security of Europe; it was 
purely pacificatory and conservative. 

“Tt was, for the great cause, the end of haphazard and the 
beginning of security. A new horizon and new scenes were 
about to unfold themselves, bright with ease and prosperity for 
all. The European system was actually established; all that 
was wanting was to organise it. : 

“T myself, satisfied on these great questions and tranquil on 
all sides, I, too, should have had my Congress and my Holy 
Alliance. Those ideas were stolen from me. In that great 
council of sovereigns we should have discussed matters of family 
interests, and settled accounts with the nations with a high hand. 

*In this way Europe would soon have been but one people, 
and everyone, travel where he might, would have still been 
in the common fatherland. I should have insisted on all the 
navigable rivers being free to all, on common rights in all seas, 
and on the great standing armies being reduced merely to an 
efficient guard for the various sovereigns. 

“On my return home, having made France great, strong, 
magnificent, glorious, and tranquil, I should have defined her 
immutable frontier; thenceforth every war would have been 
purely defensive, and all aggrandisement would have been 
regarded as anti-national. I should have made my son the 
partner of my throne; my dictatorship would have been at an 
end; his constitutional sovereignty would have begun. Paris 
would have been the capital of the world, and France the 
envy of all nations. 

“Then my leisure and old age would have been dedicated 
during my son's apprenticeship to making a tour with the 
empress—driving our own horses and taking our time like a 
country couple—visiting all the nooks of Europe, receiving 
petitions, redressing wrongs sowing good seed wherever we 
went, and founding monumental benefactions.” 


Yes, he—the torturer of the nations, foreordained by Heaven 


64 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


to fill that part—racked his brain to prove that his sole aim had 
been to do them good, that he could control the destinies of 
millions and load them with benefits by his arbitrary volition! 


“Of 400,000 men who crossed the Vistula,” he wrote, “half 
were Austrians, Prussians, Saxons, Poles, Bavarians, Wurtem- 
bergers, Mecklenburgers, Spaniards, Italians, and Neapolitans. 
The imperial army, properly speaking, contained about one- 
third of Dutch, Belgians, Rhinelanders, Piedmontese, Swiss, 
Genevese, Tuscans, Romans, natives of the 32nd military dis- 
trict, of Bremen, Hamburg, etc.; there were hardly 140,000 
men who spoke French. The invasion of Russia cost France 
itself less than 50,000: the Russian army lost four times as 
many men as the French army, in the course of the retreat, and 
various actions between Vilna and Moscow: the burning of 
Moscow cost the lives of 100,000 Russians who perished of cold 
and misery in the forests; and then, in the march from Moscow 
to the Oder, the Russian army also suffered from the severity of 
the season. Only 50,000 men reached Vilna, and less than 
18,000 got as far as Kalisch.” 


So he really believed that the war in Russia depended solely 
on his will and pleasure, and yet the horrors of the accomplished 
fact caused him no pang of remorse! He boldly took upon 
himself the responsibility of events, and his darkened intellect 
sought justification in the fact that of the hundreds of thou- 
sands of destroyed human beings there were fewer French 
than Bavarians or Russians. 


CHAPTER XXI 


Heaps of men in every variety of uniform were lying in con- 
fusion, tens of thousands of them, in the fields and meadows 
belonging to Mr. Davydow and the Crown serfs. On those 
fields and meadows, for hundreds of years the peasants of the 
neighbourhood had pastured their beasts and harvested their 
crops. Near the ambulance tents, for about a dessiatine? the 
ground and grass were soaked in blood; crowds of soldiers, some 
sound and some wounded, and of different arms, were making 
their weary way in terror towards Mojaisk or Valouiew ; others, 


! Nearly three acres. 


65 


WAR AND PEACE 


hungry and worn out with fatigue, mechanically formed in line 
and followed their officers; while others again stayed on where 
they had been posted and went on firing. Over the field where, 
a few hours since, all had looked bright and smiling, where 
bayonets had glittered and the iridescent mists of morning had 
veiled the scene, there now hung a dense fog made heavy by 
smoke and exhaling a strange reek of powder and blood. Black 
clouds had gathered overhead, a fine drizzle was bedewing the 
dead, the wounded and the utterly weary. It seemed to be 
saying to them: “Enough, enough, hapless wretches! Bethink 
yourselves. What are you doing?” Then a thought seemed 
to dawn in the minds of the poor creatures, and they began to 
ask themselves whether they were to go on with this butchery. 
The idea did not, however, gain ground till the evening; till 
then, though the struggle was drawing to a close, and the men felt ` 
all the horror of their position, a mysterious and inexplicable 
impulse had guided the hand of the gunner who had survived of 
the three told off to serve each cannon; and who stood faithful 
though covered with sweat, powder, and blood. He alone 
carried the cartridges, loaded the gun, aimed it, and lighted the 
slow match! The balls met and crossed, carried death to 
numberless victims, and still the fearful work went on, the 
outcome, not of any human will, but of the Will which governs 
men and worlds. 

Anyone looking on at the fast dispersing French and Russian 
armies, might have thought that a very slight effort on the part 
of one or the other would have sufficed to annihilate the foe. 
But neither side made that last effort, and the battle died away 
by degrees. The Russians did not take up the offensive because, 
having been collected on the road to Moscow, from the first, and 
charged to defend it, they stayed there till the end. Indeed, if 
they had decided on attacking the French, the disorder of their 
ranks would not have admitted of it, for even without quitting 
their position they had lost half their numbers. The effort 
could only have been possible—or perhaps indeed easy—to the 
French, who were kept up by the traditions of fifteen years of 
success under Napoleon, by their confidence of victory, the com- 
parative smallness of their loss—not more than a quarter of the 
whole efficient force—the knowledge that behind them lay a 
reserve of more than 20,000 fresh Guards who had not charged, 
and their wrath at having failed to dislodge the enemy from 
his positions. Historians have said that Napoleon might have 
decided the day in his favour if only he had brought up the 


66 


THE FRENCH AT’* MOSCOW 


“Vieille Garde” ; but to say this is to assume that winter may 
suddenly become spring. The failure cannot be imputed to 
Napoleon. Every man, from the commander-in-chief to the 
humblest private, knew that such an effort was out of the 
question; in point of fact the spirit of the French army was 
thoroughly quelled by this formidable foe, who, after losing 
half his force, was as resolute at last as at first. 

The victory won by the Russians was not indeed one of those 
which are bedizened with those rags nailed to a pole which are 
dignified as flags, or which derive their splendour from extent of 
conquest; but it was one of those triumphs which carry home 
to the soul of the aggressor a two-fold conviction of his adver- 
sary’s moral superiority and of his own weakness. The invading 
army, like some wild beast broken loose, had been. mortally 
wounded; it was consciously rushing on to ruin; but the first 
impetus had been given, and now, come what might, it must 
reach Moscow. The Russian army, on the other hand, though 
twice as weak, was no less inexorably impelled to resist. At 
Moscow, still bleeding from the wounds inflicted at Borodino, 
these efforts were to lead inevitably to Napoleon’s flight—to 
his retreat by the way by which he had come, to the almost 
total destruction of 500,000 men who had followed him, and 
to the annihilation of his personal influence, overpowered as 
it was, even at Borodino, by an adversary whose moral force 
was so far superior. 


67 


BOOK TWELVE 


CHAPTER XXII 


TRE human intellect is incapable of understanding d priori the 
idea of unceasing movement in a body; it can only apprehend 
it when it is at leisure to analyse the component factors and 
study them separately; at the same time, it is this subdivision 
into definite units which gives rise to many errors. For instance, 
a well-known sophism of the ancients tended to prove that 
Achilles could never overtake a tortoise crawling in front of 
him even though he walked ten times as fast as the animal; 
for, every time Achilles should have picked up the distance 
between them, the tortoise would have got ahead by a tenth 
of the space; and when Achilles had covered that tenth the 
tortoise would again have gained a hundredth, and so on, ad 
infinitum. The ancients regarded this as an unanswerable 
dilemma; its absurdity lies in the fact that the progress of 
Achilles and the tortoise is calculated on units with stoppage 
between, while it 1s in fact continuous. 

By assuming the minutest units of any given motion as a 
basis of calculation, we may constantly approach a solution 
without ever reaching it; it is only by admitting infinitesimal 
quantities and their progression up to a tenth, and adopting 
the total of this geometrical progression, that we can attain the 
desired result. The modern science of the value of the infini- 
tesimal solves questions which of old were regarded as insoluble. 
By admitting these infinitesimals it restores motion to its 
primary condition of inherent perpetuity, and so corrects the 
errors which the human mind is led to commit by regarding 
the separate units of motion instead of motion as a whole. 

In our search for the laws of history the same rule must be 
observed. The onward march of humanity, while it is the sum 
total of an infinite multitude of individual wills, is nevertheless 
uninterrupted; the study of these laws is the object of history, 
and in order to account for those which govern the sum of the 
wills causing that uninterrupted movement, the human mind 
admits the theory of independent and separate wills. The first 
process in history is to take at random a series of successive 


68 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


events, and then to examine them apart from all others; but, 
in fact, there can be no beginning to them and no end, since 
each event is the necessary outcome of that which preceded it. 
In the second place, history studies the actions of a single man 
—a king or a general—and accepts them as the result of the 
wills of all men, while this result is never summed up in the 
actions of a single man, however lofty his position. However 
minute the units may be which the historian takes into account 
with a view to getting as near as possible to the truth, we can- 
not but feel that by isolating them, by assuming an independent 
cause for each phenomenon, and by supposing that human 
wills can find their expression in the acts of one single historic 
personage, he remains in error. 

No such historical conclusion can bear the scalpel of criticism, 
because criticism selects a more or less extensive general view 
of facts—as it has a perfect right to do. It is only by studying 
the differential quantities in history, together with the homo- 
geneous currents that carry men onwards, and then finding the 
integer, that we can ever hope to master its laws. 


The first fifteen years of the nineteenth century exhibit an 
unwonted stir among many millions of men. They are seen to 
quit their avocations, to rush from one side of Europe to the 
other, to plunder and kill each other, to triumph for a while, 
and then in their turn be beaten. During this period all the 
course of daily life undergoes a complete change, till suddenly 
this ferment, which at one time seemed as though it must go 
on increasing, utterly subsides. “What was the cause of this 
phenomenon? What laws did it follow?" are the questions 
asked by human reason. 

By way of a reply, historians narrate the deeds or report the 
speeches of a few score of men in a building in the city of 
Paris; to these acts and speeches they give the name of the 
Revolution; they next give us an elaborate biography of 
Napoleon Bonaparte, and of certain other persons who became 
his friends or his foes; they tell us of the influence these per- 
sonages exercised on each other, and then they say: “These 
are the causes of the movement; these were its laws." But 
human reason refuses to accept such an explanation; nay, it 
pronounces it faulty, because the cause is obviously inadequate 
to the effect produced. It is the sum of human energy which 
entailed the Revolution and Napoleon, as it was that which 
maintained them, and overthrew them. 


69 


WAR AND PEACE 


“Where there is conquest,” says the historian, “there is a 
conqueror, and every subversion of an empire brings forth 
great men." Very true—answers human reason—but this does 
not prove that conquerors are the cause of war, or that the 
laws which govern war lie in the power of individual action. 
Whenever the hand of my watch points to X, I hear the neigh- 
bouring clocks strike; but I should not therefore infer that the 
hand of my watch tolls the bell of the church clock. Again, 
when I see a steam locomotive in motion, I hear it whistle, 
I see the valves open and shut, and the wheels go round; but 
I do not conclude that the whistle and the valves make the 
engine move on. Country people will tell you that at the end 
of spring a cold wind blows because the oaks are budding; 
now, though I do not know why the cold wind blows, I cannot 
agree with the peasants in ascribing it to the budding of the 
oak-trees. All I find in these phenomena, as in all others, is a 
concurrence of conditions; and I may study the hand of the 
watch, or the valve of the engine, or the buds of the oak as long 
as I live, without discovering the cause of the chimes, of the 
motion, or of the cold wind. To ascertain these I must alto- 
gether change my point of view, and study the laws of steam, 
of acoustics, and of meteorology. The historian must do like- 
wise—indeed attempts have been made in this direction—and 
instead of studying only kings and emperors, ministers and 
generals, must take into account the homogeneous elements 
and infinitesimal differentials which influence the masses. No 
one can foresee the degree of truth he may attain by following 
this method; it is certainly the only right one, and hitherto 
the human intellect has not given to it the millionth part 
of the pains it has devoted to the description of sovereigns, 
warriors, and ministers, and the analysis of the combinations 
their deeds have suggested. 


CHAPTER XXIII 


THE united forces of European nations had thrown themselves 
on Russia; the Russian army and population retired before 
them, avoiding a collision, from the frontier to Smolensk, from 
Smolensk to Borodino, and the French troops bore on for 
Moscow with a momentum of increasing ratio, as a body dropped 


70 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


from a height falls more quickly as it approaches the earth. 
Behind them lay thousands of versts of devastated and hostile 
country. Ahead, tens of versts between them and the desired 
goal. Every soldier in Napoleon’s army felt and obeyed the 
impetus that pushed him forward. Among the Russians, the 
more decisive the retreat became the more did their hatred of 
the invader increase and rankle in every heart. We have seen 
the terrific collision between the two hostile forces that took 
place at Borodino. Still, neither yielded; and after that con- 
flict the Russians continued their retreat as inevitably as a 
ball which strikes another with a greater impetus rolls back; 
and as inevitably, the ball with the greater impetus (though it 
loses most of its force because of the impact) continues to roll 
onward for a while longer. 

The Russians withdrew to a hundred and twenty versts 
behind Moscow; the French entered the capital, and halting 
there as a wild beast squats to lick its wounds when driven 
into a corner, they spent five weeks without offering battle, to 
fly afterwards, without any reason, home by the road by which 
they came. They crowded the road to Kalouga, and in spite 
of à victory at Malo-Yaroslavetz, made the best of their way 
back to Smolensk, Vilna, the Bérésina and so on. 

By sunset on the 7th of September Koutouzow and the 
Russian army was convinced that the battle of Borodino was 
a victory for them. The commander-in-chief announced it to 
the czar, and issued orders to the troops to hold themselves in 
readiness for another action, which should finally crush the 
enemy, not because he wanted to deceive anybody, but because 
he knew the enemy was vanquished, as did every one of those 
who took part in the action. But in the course of the evening 
and next day reports came in of losses that had not been 
suspected. The army was diminished by half, and a second 
engagement out of the question. How could they think of 
fighting again before they had even received complete informa- 
tion, rescued the wounded, carried off the dead, appointed fresh 
officers and given the men time to breathe and to eat? Mean- 
while the French, propelled by that fatal momentum, were 
driving them back. Koutouzow eagerly desired to renew the 
struggle on the morrow, and so did his army; but something 
more than the wish was necessary. It had to be possible, and 
it was absolutely impossible. On the contrary, a retreat was 
indispensable; from day to day, from stage to stage till the 
army arrived under the walls of Moscow, and then it was 


JA 


WAR AND PEACE 


compelled by circumstances to retire even farther, notwith- 
standing the vehement feeling against it which was seething in 
the ranks. Thus Moscow fell into the hands of the foe. 

Those who fancy that the plan of a campaign, or of an engage- 
ment, is elaborated by the generals in the silence of a study, 
forget or misunderstand the inevitable conditions under which 
a commander-in-chief carries on his operations. These are not 
in the least as we imagine them: we suppose him to be engaged 
in working out a campaign on a map of this or that district, 
with a known number of troops on each side, on familiar ground, 
and planning every movement at leisure. The commander-in- 
chief never enjoys such opportunities. He is never at the 
beginning of an event, as we imagine him to be. He is neces- 
sarily in the middle of a series of events, each one inevitably 
flowing from its predecessors. And every moment he is sur- 
rounded by conflicting interests, anxieties, orders, threats, 
schemes, and advice, and is always forced to reply to countless 
contradictory questions. 

Military writers tell us quite seriously that Koutouzow ought 
to have got his troops on the Kalouga road before they had 
marched so far as the village of Fili; and that such a scheme 
was actually suggested to him; but they overlook the fact that 
a commander-in-chief has, in such critical junctures, ten or a 
dozen schemes proposed to him, each based on theoretical 
tactics and strategy, and all diametrically dissimilar. It might 
seem, no doubt, that his task would be to select one among 
them; but even that becomes impossible, for time and events 
do not stand still. Supposing, for instance, that on the oth it is 
suggested to Koutouzow that he should get the troops together 
on the Kalouga road, while, at the same time, an aide-de-camp 
comes up from Miloradovitch to inquire whether he is to attack 
the French or to retire; he must answer at once, and if he 
orders the attack, that takes him away from the high-road. 
The commissariat officers ask him where the stores are to be 
sent; the head of the hospital department wants to know which 
way the wounded are to go; a courier rushes in from St. Peters- 
burg with a letter from the czar refusing to admit the possibility 
of abandoning Moscow, while a rival—for every commander- 
in-chief has rivals—comes to submit to him a scheme exactly 
the contrary of that which he has decided on. Add to this 
external pressure the minor facts that the commander-in-chief 
is in need of rest and sleep to recruit his exhausted strength; 
that he has to attend to the complaint of a general who con- 


72 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


siders himself slighted—to the petitions of the residents who 
think they are being abandoned to their fate—to the report of 
an officer who has been sent to inspect the neighbourhood and 
who exactly contradicts the last account—while a spy, a 
prisoner, and another officer give him various pictures of the 
enemy’s position—and the reader may understand that those 
who fancy that at Fili, within five versts of the capital, Kou- 
touzow was free to decide as to the defence or loss of Moscow, 
are utterly mistaken. 

When was the question really settled? Why, at Drissa, 
Smolensk, and irrevocably, at last, at Schevardino on the 
5th of September, and at Borodino on the 7th. After that 
every day, every hour, every minute of the retreat sealed the 
fate of the capital. 


CHAPTER XXIV 


WHEN Yermolow, who had been sent by Koutouzow to study 
the position, came back to tell him that it was vain to make 
a stand under the walls of Moscow, the commander-in-chief 
gazed at him in silence. 

“Give me your hand," he said presently, and he felt his 
pulse. * Vou are ill, my friend; think of what you are saying." 
For he could not acknowledge the necessity of withdrawing 
beyond this point without another engagement. 

Koutouzow got out of his carriage on the hill of Poklonnaia, 
six versts from the Dorogomilow gate of the city, and seated 
himself on a bench; a crowd of officers gathered round him, 
among them Count Rostopchine, who had just arrived from 
Moscow. This brilliant party divided into several knots, dis- 
cussing the advantages and disadvantages of their position, 
the situation of the troops, the various plans proposed, and the 
temper of the Muscovites. All were well aware that it was in 
fact a council of war, though it was not called so. The conver- 
sation was confined to generalities; private news was exchanged 
in an undertone: not a jest, not a smile relaxed these anxious 
faces, and each one was evidently striving to be equal to the 
situation. The general-in-chief listened to all the opinions put 
forward, but took no part in the discussion, and expressed no 
views of his own. Now and then, after listening to some 
speaker, he turned away, disappointed at not hearing what he 


73 


WAR AND PEACE 


had hoped to hear. Some were talking over the position now 
chosen, some not merely criticising the choice, but abusing 
the choosers; a third opined that the mistake lay farther back, 
that an action should have been risked two days since; while 
a fourth was giving an account of the battle of Salamanca, of 
which the details had just come to hand through a F renchman 
named Crossart. 

This Frenchman, who wore a Spanish uniform, was present 
with a German prince in the Russian service, and in anticipa- 
tion of the possible defence of Moscow, was describing, at some 
length, all the vicissitudes of the siege of Saragossa. Count 
Rostopchine declared that he and the militia were ready to die 
under the walls of the ancient capital, and he could not help 
regretting the obscure inaction to which they had been left; 
he added that if he could have foreseen the turn affairs had 
taken he would have acted differently. Some of these gentle- 
men making a parade of their deep-laid strategical plots, argued 
over the direction in which the troops ought to move; the 
greater number, however, talked mere nonsense. Koutouzow’s 
face grew ever more worried and anxious. From all he heard, 
Koutouzow could draw but one conclusion: namely, that it 
was impossible to hold Moscow. An order to make a stand and 
give battle would only have led to dire disorder; for not only 
did the generals regard the position as untenable, but they 
had already begun to consider the possibility and consequences 
of a further retreat, and this feeling pervaded the whole army. 
While almost all had abandoned the idea, Bennigsen, to be 
sure, continued to favour it; but the question itself had ceased 
to be the real point—it was no more than a pretext for discussion 
and intrigue. Koutouzow quite understood this, and estimated 
at its true value the patriotic feeling of which Bennigsen made 
a display with a persistency calculated to provoke the com- 
mander-in-chief to the last degree. In case of failure the blame 
would recoil on him, Koutouzow, for having led his army without 
a fight, as far as the Sparrow hills; or, in the event of his refusing 
to carry out Bennigsen’s scheme, that officer would wash his 
hands of the crime of abandoning Moscow. 

But all these intrigues were not prominent in the old man’s 
mind; another and far more sinister problem rose before him. 
to which no answer had suggested itself: “Am I, in fact; 
responsible for Napoleon’s advance to the very gates of Mos- 
cow? Which of my movements can have led to such a result?” 
he asked himself a hundred times. “Was it last evening, when 


74 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


I sent to desire Platow to retire—or the day before, when I was 
half asleep, and told Bennigsen to act as he thought best? 
Well, Moscow must be left to its fate, the army must retreat, 
we can but submit!” And he felt it equally terrible to have to 
pronounce this decision or to have to resign his authority; for 
he not only loved power, which he was accustomed to wield, 
but he firmly believed himself destined to be the deliverer of his 
country; indeed, was not this what the country had expected 
of him when it insisted on his being appointed, in opposition 
to the wishes of the czar? He believed that he alone could 
command the army in these critical circumstances, that he 
alone could face the invincible conqueror without a qualm— 
but now a decisive step must be taken; at any rate the empty 
babble of these gentlemen must be put an end to. He called 
the seniors to him and said: 

“For good or for evil I must trust my own judgment—" 
he got into his carriage and returned to Fili. 


CHAPTER XXV 


A CoUNCIL of war was held at two o'clock in the more roomy 
of two cottages belonging to a man named Andrew Sévastianow. 
A crowd of peasants, women, and no end of children stood round 
the door of the other cottage; only the proprietor's little grand- 
daughter Malacha, a child of six, on whom his highness had 
bestowed a kiss and a lump of sugar, had stayed in the big room, 
perched above the stove and staring with shy curiosity at the 
uniforms and orders of the staff-officers who came in one by one, 
and seated themselves under the Holy Images. ‘‘The grand- 
father," as Malacha called Koutouzow, was sitting apart in a 
dark corner by the stove. He was huddled together in his 
camp-chair, muttering and nervously tugging at the collar of 
his uniform, which seemed to throttle him though it was open 
at the throat. He shook hands with some of those who came 
in, and bowed to others. Kaissarow was about to open the 
curtain of the window facing his chief, but an impatient gesture 
warned him that Koutouzow wished to sit in the half-light, so 
that his features might not be too plainly visible. So many 
officers gathered round the deal table spread with plans, maps, 
paper and pencils, that the orderlies had to bring in another 
bench, on which the last-comers took their seat: Yermolow, 


75 


WAR AND PEACE 


Kaissarow, and Toll. The place of honour, exactly under the 
images, was filled by Barclay de Tolly, wearing the cross of 
St. George. His pale, sickly face, with a wide forehead that 
was all the more conspicuous from being bald, betrayed the 
ravages of a fever of which the ague fit was at this moment 
making him shiver. Ouvarow, who sat by him, was telling him 
something in a low voice with jerky gesticulation; no one 
indeed spoke above his breath. Dokhtourow, a short fat man, 
with his hands folded over his stomach, was listening eagerly. 
Facing him sat Count Ostermann-Tolstoi, his elbow on the 
table and his head on his hand—a handsome head with large 
features and bright eyes—lost in thought. Raievsky, as usual, 
kept combing his black hair over his temples with his fingers 
and twisting it into ringlets, while he glanced impatiently now. 
at Koutouzow, and now at the door. Konovnitzine’s charming 
and interesting face was lighted up by a pleasant smile; he 
had caught Malacha's eyes and was amusing himself by making 
little signs to her, to which she shyly replied. 

They were waiting for Bennigsen, who, under pretence of 
reconnoitring the position once more, was in fact taking his 
time over a capital dinner; thus they spent two hours, from 
four till six, chatting in undertones, without coming to any 
determination. 

When Bennigsen at last made his appearance Koutouzow 
went up to the table, but still so as to avoid placing himself 
in the full light of the candles which had just been lighted. 
Bennigsen opened the proceedings by formally proposing this 
question: 

“Are we to abandon without a struggle the ancient and holy 
capital of Russia, or are we to defend it?" 

There was a long and breathless silence. Every brow was 
knit, every eye turned on Koutouzow, who, frowning too, was 
clearing his throat and trying to speak without betraying his 
agitation. Malacha, too, was watching him. 

“The old and holy capital of Russia?" he suddenly exclaimed 
loudly and angrily, emphasising the words so as to accentuate 
their fallacious plausibility. “Allow me to remind your excel- 
lency that the phrase conveys absolutely no meaning to Russian 
hearts. This is not the way to formulate the question which I 
have invited these gentlemen here to discuss. It is simply a 
military problem, to be stated as follows: Since the safety of 
the country depends on the army, is it more advantageous to 
risk its destruction and the loss of Moscow by fighting a pitched 


76 


Everybody who was able to, abandoned the capital 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


battle, or to withdraw without resistance and leave the city to 
its fate? That is the point on which I ask your counsel.” 

Discussion at once recommenced; Bennigsen, who would not 
take a beating, sided with Barclay, who thought that it was 
impossible to hold Fili; he consequently proposed that during 
the night the Russian right should be marched across to 
strengthen the left, and then attack the enemy's right. On 
this point votes were divided, and the pros and cons were 
warmly argued; Yermolow, Dokhtourow, and Raievsky sup- 
ported Bennigsen. Was it that they thought some sacrifice 
must be made before Moscow was abandoned, or had they other 
and personal ends in view? They did not seem to understand 
that their combination could no longer check the fatal march 
of events. Moscow was, to all intents, already abandoned. 
The other officers saw it clearly, and only debated as to the 
line to be taken by the retreating army. 

Malacha, looking on, wide eyed, understood the matter quite 
differently; she thought that “the grandfather” and “the long- 
coat,” as she called Bennigsen in her own mind, were having a 
quarrel. She saw that they were certainly irritating each other, 
and at the bottom of her little heart she was sure that “the 
grandfather” was right; she caught his keen and cunning glance 
on its way to Bennigsen, and was charmed to see the old man 
set his antagonist down. Bennigsen reddened and walked 
across the room; Koutouzow’s words, though calm and few, 
expressed entire disapproval. 

“I could not possibly approve of the count’s plan, gentlemen. 
To change the disposition of an army in the immediate proximity 
of the enemy is always a dangerous manœuvre. History proves 
it. Thus, for instance,” he paused as if to recall some facts, 
and then, with a look of affected candour straight into Ben- 
nigsen’s face he went on—“ for instance, at the battle of Fried- 
land—which, as you no doubt remember, count, went against 
us—the disaster was due to precisely such a change.” A silence, 
lasting perhaps a minute, but which seemed never-ending, 
weighed on the meeting. Presently the discussion began 
again, but it was fragmentary; the subject was practically 
exhausted. 

Koutouzow suddenly sighed deeply; the others understanding 
that he was about to speak, turned to listen. 

“Well, gentlemen, I see that I must take it on my own 
shoulders. I have listened to everyone’s opinion; I know that 
some of you will never agree with me; nevertheless . . ." and 


ue 


WAR AND PEACE 


he rose—*'in virtue of the power placed in my hands by the 
czar and my country, I command that we shall retreat." 

The meeting broke up in solemn silence; it might have been 
a mass for the dead. Malacha, who had long since been due 
at supper, crept carefully down backwards from her perch, 
placing her little bare feet on the projections of the stove; then, 
gliding almost between the officers' legs, she vanished through 
the half-open door. 

Koutouzow remained a long time with his elbows on the table 
thinking over this cruel dilemma; wondering again how and 
when the loss of Moscow had become inevitable, and to whom 
it could be imputed. 

“I did not expect it to come to this," he said to Schneider, 
the aide-de-camp who came in to see him late at night. “I 
never could have believed it possible!" [ 

* You must get some rest, highness," said the aide-de-camp. 

* Well, we shall see! I will make them eat horseflesh yet, as 
I did the Turks," cried Koutouzow, thumping the table with 
his fist. “They shall eat it, they shall eat it!” he repeated. 


CHAPTER XXVI 


IN contrast to Koutouzow, and to digress to a far more serious 
catastrophe than the retreat of the army—the desertion and 
burning of Moscow—Count Rostopchine, generally regarded as 
responsible for it, acted quite differently. All Russia—animated 
at this day by the spirit which then stirred our forefathers— 
might have prophesied these events which, after Borodino, 
were inevitable. 

At Smolensk, and in every town and village in the empire, 
the same spirit prevailed as at Moscow, though they did not 
come within the influence of Count Rostopchine and his pro- 
clamations. The whole nation simply sat waiting for the enemy 
with stolid indifference, without excitement or disorder of any 
kind. They awaited him calmly, feeling that when the time 
came they should act as duty required. As soon as the enemy 
was known to be near, the well-to-do classes withdrew, leaving 
their possessions behind them, and the poor burnt and destroyed 
what was left. A conviction that it was the finger of fate, and 
that this was and must ever be the course of events, was, and 
still is, deeply rooted in every Russian heart. This conviction 


78 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


—nay, I may say a prophetic certainty—that Moscow would 
be taken, pervaded every grade of society in the town. Those 
who left in July and August, abandoning their homes and half 
their possessions, proved that this was so, for they acted under 
the influence of that latent patriotism which finds no utterance 
in speeches, or in sacrificing our children for our country’s 
good, or in other actions contrary to human nature, but which 
is expressed simply and unpretentiously, and so leads to great 
results. 

“Tt is disgraceful,” said Count Rostopchine’s addresses, “to 
fly before danger; only cowards will desert Moscow!” and 
nevertheless they fled, in spite of being stigmatised as cowards. 
They fled because they felt that it was to be. Rostopchine 
had not frightened them with tales of the horrors committed 
by Napoleon in the countries he had conquered. They knew 
very well that Berlin and Vienna had not suffered, but that 
during the French occupation, those capitals had been gay with 
the fascinating conquerors who had bewitched the men, and 
even the women in Russia. They fled because, as Russians, 
they could not remain under French supremacy—good or bad; 
they could not accept the fact. They fled before the battle of 
Borodino, and, even farther, after the battle of Borodino, 
paying no attention to calls for defence; notwithstanding the 
Moscow military governor’s expressed intention of raising the 
icon of the Iberian Holy Virgin and going with it into battle, 
or the balloons that were to destroy the French army; not- 
withstanding all the nonsense that was written by Rostopchine 
in his proclamations. They knew that the army must fight, 
and if it could not it was quite impossible to go with the young 
ladies and the servants to the Three Hills to fight Napoleon, 
and one had to leave town, however much one regretted leaving 
one’s possessions behind. They fled without dreaming that 
there was any magnanimity in leaving a splendid and wealthy 
city to be burnt and plundered—as they knew it certainly would 
be at once—for it is only too true that to abstain from burning 
and plundering forsaken homes is a virtue quite out of the ken 
of the Russian populace, they fled each one for himself, and 
yet, because they fled, that great event happened that will 
always be the greatest glory of the Russian people. Hence a 
great lady, who in the month of June moved away from Moscow, 
with her negro servants and her buffoons, to take refuge on her 
estate near Saratow, in spite of the risk of being arrested by 
Rostopchine's orders, was instinctively determined never to be 


79 


WAR AND PEACE 


Napoleon’s subject, and in our opinion she was really and truly 
helping in the great work of saving the country. 

Count Rostopchine, on the contrary—who blamed the 
fugitives, and sent the courts of justice to sit out of town; who 
served out bad weapons to tipsy brawlers; who ordered a pro- 
cession one day, and forbade it the next; who seized all the 
private carriages and carts, taking 136 carts to move the balloon 
made by Leppich; who announced that he would set Moscow 
in flames, and his own house first, and an hour after contradicted 
himself; who appealed to the inhabitants to seize all spies, and 
then abused them for doing so; who drove out all the French, 
and left Madame Aubers-Chalmé, whose house was the great 
meeting-place for the French colony in Moscow; who without 
a shadow of a reason, exiled Klutcharew, the worthy old head 
of the post-office; who assembled a mob on the Three Hills, 
as he said, to repel the enemy, and then, to get rid of them, 
handed over a man to their fury; who declared that he should 
not survive the overthrow of Moscow, and wrote French verses 
in albums about his own part in the matter—such a man had no 
conception of the moral strength underlying the events going 
forward under his eyes. His one idea was to act independently, 
to startle the world by some heroic stroke of patriotism, and 
he laughed like a mischievous boy at the desertion and burning 
of Moscow, while he tried to promote or to check, with his puny 
arm, the irresistible current of national feeling which bore him, 
like others, down on its tide. 


CHAPTER XXVII 


HELEN, when she returned with the court from Vilna, found 
herself in a delicate position. At St. Petersburg she rejoiced in 
the protection of a magnate holding one of the most important 
offices of state; but at Vilna she had made friends with a young 
foreign prince, and as the two gentlemen each claimed her parti- 
cular favour, her business was to solve the difficult problem of 
how to keep up both intimacies without offending either rival. 
However, what would have seemed perplexing, if not impossible, 
to any other woman, she accomplished without a moment's 
hesitation; instead of concealing facts or stooping to subterfuge 
in order to extricate herself from a false position—which must 
have been fatal to her success by proving her guilt, she at once 


80 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


took the bull by the horns and, like a skilful diplomatist, put 
herself in the right. 

When the young prince on his first visit loaded her with 
jealous reproaches, she tossed her handsome head, looking at 
him over her shoulder. 

“That is just like a man’s cruelty and selfishness,” she said 
haughtily. “I expected as much: a woman sacrifices herself 
for you; she is to suffer, and this is her reward. And pray 
what right have you to exact an account of my friendships? 
This man has been more than a father to me. Of course,” she 
hastily added, to prevent his interrupting her, “he may not 
feel towards me as towards a daughter, but that is no reason 
for turning him out of my house. I am not a man, that I 
should be so ungrateful. I would have you to know, highness, 
that I account for my private feelings only to God and my 
conscience”; and she laid her hand on her beautiful bosom, 
which heaved with emotion as she raised her eyes to heaven. 

“But listen to me, I entreat you... . 

“Marry me and I will be your slave!” 

“But it is impossible. . . .” 

* Ah! you will not stoop so low," and she burst into tears. 

The prince tried to comfort her, while she, through her sobs, 
argued that a divorce was obtainable, that cases had been 
known—but there had as yet been so few that she could only 
name Napoleon and some other royal personages—that she and 
her husband had never been anything to each other, that she 
had been sacrificed. . . . 

“But religion, law! ... 
persuaded. 

"Religion! Law! what would be the use of them if they 
could not help in such cases?" 

The young prince was startled by this suggestion, simple as 
it seemed; he asked counsel of the reverend fathers of the 
Society of Jesus with whom he was on intimate terms. A few 
days later, at one of the brilliant entertainments which Helen 
was in the habit of giving at her suburban house in Kam- 
mennoi-Ostrow, a fascinating Jesuit priest was introduced to her, 
a Monsieur de Jobert, whose glittering black eyes were in 
strange contrast to his hair, which was as white as snow. They 
sat talking together for a long time in the garden, in the poetic 
light of a splendid illumination, to the exciting strains of an 
inspiriting orchestra, discussing the love of the creature for the 
Creator, for the Redeemer, for the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and 


» 


) 


objected the young man, half- 


81 


WAR AND PEACE 


Mary, and of the consolations in this life and the next promised 
by the only true faith, the Roman Catholic religion. Helen, 
deeply touched by these words, felt her eyes moisten more than 
once as she listened to Monsieur de Jobert’s voice, tremulous 
with pious emotion. The conversation was interrupted by a 
partner who came to find her for a waltz; but on the following 
day her future director spent the evening with her alone, and 
from that time frequented the house. 

One day he escorted the countess to the Catholic church, 
where she remained on her knees for a long time in front of one 
of the altars. The French priest, who though no longer young, 
was a compound of saintly attractions, laid his hands on her 
head, and at that imposition she felt as she afterwards stated 
—a pure, fresh air that seemed to touch her heart. . . . It 
was the operation of Grace! 

Then she was brought into contact with a superior eccle- 
siastic, who heard her confession and gave her absolution; and 
the next day carned to her, in her own house, a gold vessel 
containing the sacred Host. He congratulated her on having 
entered the bosom of the Holy Catholic Church, assured her 
that the pope would be informed of her conversion, and that 
she would ere long be favoured by him with an important 
communication. 

All that was going on around her and in her behalf, the 
attention of all these priestly personages with their subtle 
elegance of speech, the dove-like innocence she was supposed 
to have recovered—figured forth in her person by dresses and 
ribands of immaculate whiteness—all afforded a delightfully 
new amusement. At the same time she kept her main object 
in view, and, as always happens in an affair where the motive 
force is cunning, the weaker brain stole a march and outwitted 
the stronger. 

Helen perfectly understood that the real end of all these fine 
speeches and strenuous efforts was merely to convert her to 
Romanism, and extract money for the use of the Order; hence 
she never failed to insist on the hastening of the formalities 
needed to procure her divorce, before acceding to any demands 
on her purse. So far as she was concerned, all she asked of 
religion was that it should help her to satisfy her desires and 
whims within the limits of certain conventional proprieties. 
So one day, in talking to her confessor, she urged him to tell 
her precisely how far she was bound by her marriage tie. It 
was twilight; they were sitting by the open window, and the 


82 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


evening air brought in the scent of flowers. A dress of Indian 
muslin scarcely veiled the whiteness of Helen’s shoulders; the 
abbé plump and clean shaved, with his white hands modestly 
clasped on his knees, gazing at her beauty with decorous rapture, 
explained to her his views on this delicate and interesting 
question. Helen smiled a little uneasily; it might have been 
thought that she feared, from her director’s look of admiration, 
lest the conversation should take an embarrassing turn. But, 
though he felt the spell of the lady’s charms, the abbé evidently 
also enjoyed the pleasure of working out his arguments with art. 

“In your ignorance of the duties to which you were pledging 
yourself,” said he, “you swore to be faithful to a man who, on 
his part, by entering into the bonds of matrimony without 
recognising its religious solemnity, profaned the sacrament. 
Consequently, such a marriage is not of full and perfect effect: 
nevertheless your vow was binding. You have broken it. 
What then is your sin? Mortal or venial? Venial, beyond a 
doubt, since you committed it with no evil intent. If in 
marrying another man you hope to have children, your sin 
may be forgiven you; but here a fresh question arises. . . ." 

“But,” interrupted Helen impatiently, “what I ask myself 
is this: How, after being converted to the true faith, can I 
remain bound by pledges taken under the false one?” 

This remark had the same kind of effect on the father con- 
fessor as the solution of the problem of the egg of Columbus; 
he was astounded at the simplicity with which the difficulty 
had been settled. Though amazed and delighted at his cate- 
chumen’s rapid progress, he would not at once give up his 
chain of argument. 

“Let us quite understand each other, countess . . he 
said, trying to find some answer to his spiritual daughter. 


CHAPTER XXVIII 


HELEN was perfectly aware that the affair was entirely free 
from all obstacles from the religious point of view, and that 
the objections raised by her directors were based solely on their 
fear of the secular authorities. So she made up her mind that 
society must be gradually prepared for it. She began by 
exciting her old protector’s jealousy, and played the same farce 
with him as with the prince. He, no less astounded at first 


83 


WAR AND PEACE 


than the younger man had been, at the suggestion that he 
should marry a woman whose husband was still living, was, 
thanks to Helen’s imperturbable impudence, not long in coming 
to the idea that it was a quite natural possibility. Helen 
would certainly never have gained her point if she had shown 
the slightest misgiving, the slightest scruple, or made the 
smallest mystery; but she told all her intimate friends—that 
is to say all St. Petersburg—without the faintest reserve, and 
with the most matter-of-course frankness, that both the prince 
and the old excellency had proposed to marry her, that she was 
equally fond of them both, and that she did not know how she 
could bear to hurt the feelings of either. The rumour of her 
divorce soon gained a hearing; many good people would have 
been up in arms at the idea, but, as she had taken care to 
mention that interesting detail as to her indecisions between ` 
her two adorers, those very people did not know what objection 
toraise. She had shifted the whole question to another footing: 
it had ceased to be whether such a thing could be, and was now 
only which of her two suitors offered the greater advantages, 
and how the court would take her choice. Here and there, of 
course, there were prejudiced persons who were incapable of 
rising to such sublime heights, and who spoke of the whole 
business as a profanation of the marriage sacrament; but they 
were few, and they demurred only in an undertone. As to 
whether or no it were right for a woman to marry a second 
time during the lifetime of her first husband, no one hinted 
the doubt; that part of the matter, it was said, had been 
settled by superior authorities, and no one would risk looking 
like a fool or an ill-bred ignoramus. 

Maria Dmitrievna Afrassimow was the only person who 
allowed herself to express a contrary view for the benefit of the 
public. She was in St. Petersburg that summer to see one of 
her sons. She met Helen at a ball, stopped her in the middle 
of the room, and said in her hard, loud voice, in the midst of 
a general silence: 

“So you are going to marry again while your husband is 
alive? And do you suppose you have invented a novelty? 
Not at all, my dear, others have thought of it before you, and 
it has long been the custom in all..." She spoke, rolled back 
her wide sleeves—an old habit of hers—looked at her sternly, 
and turned her back on her. 

Though everyone was afraid of Maria Dmitrievna, it was 
often said that she was crazy; her scolding was soon forgotten, 


84 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


all but the insult at the end, and this was repeated in whispers, 
as if all the salt of the discourse resided there. 

Prince Basil, who lately had very much lost his memory, and 
was constantly repeating himself, would say to his daughter, 
whenever he met her: 

“Helen, I have a word to say to you; I have heard of some 
scheme, some arrangements—hey, you know? Well, my dear 
child, you know that I have a father’s heart, and should be 
rejoiced to think—you have had so much to bear—dear child, 
consult your own heart. That is all I have to say—” and to 
conceal his affected emotion he would clasp her in his arms. 

Bilibine had not lost his reputation as a man of parts; he 
was one of those disinterested allies which a woman of the 
world not unfrequently attaches to herself, a man to be trusted 
never to change his attitude. One day as they were sitting 
together, he gave her his views on this important subject. 

“Listen, Bilibine," said Helen, who commonly called her 
friends of this type by their surnames, and she laid her white 
hand, with its blazing rings, on his shoulder: “Tell me, as 
you would your own sister, what I had better do—which of 
the two?” Bilibine frowned and reflected. 

“You do not take me by surprise,” he said. “I think of it 
constantly. If you marry the prince you have lost the chance 
of marrying the other for ever; and you will displease the 
court, for he is, you know, in some way connected. If, on the 
other hand, you take the old count, you will make his last days 
happy, and then, as the widow of so great a man, the prince 
would marry an equal in marrying you.” 

“You are a true friend!” cried Helen, radiantly. “But the 
thing is, that I like them both so much; I should not like to pain 
either—I would give my life to make them both happy!” 

Bilibine shrugged his shoulders; he evidently saw no remedy 
for this misfortune. 

*What a woman! One of a thousand!" ne said to himself. 
“That is what I call putting things plainly. Why, she would 
like to marry all three at once. Tell me,” he continued aloud, 
“what will your husband say to the matter? Will he consent?” 

“Oh! he is much too fond of me to refuse to do anything for 
me," said Helen, convinced that Peter too was in love with her. 

“Fond enough of you to divorce you?” asked Bilibine. 
Helen laughed heartily. 

Helen's mother was also one of those who ventured to doubt 
the legality of the proposed marriage. She was always gnawed 


85 


WAR AND PEACE 


by envy of her daughter, and she could not bear to think of 
such good fortune falling to her lot; so she inquired of a Russian 
priest as to the possibility of a divorce. The priest assured 
her, to her great satisfaction, that the thing was impossible, 
and supported his opinion by a text from the Gospel. Armed 
with these arguments, which she regarded as incontrovertible, 
the princess went off to her daughter very early in the morning, 
to be sure of finding her alone. Helen listened quietly, and 
smiled with gentle irony. 

“I assure you," said her mother, “marriage with a divorced 
woman is expressly prohibited.” 

“Oh! mamma, do not talk nonsense; you know nothing 
about it. I have duties, in my position .. ." 

“But, my dear child . . .” 

“But, mamma, do you really suppose that the holy father, 
who has the power to grant dispensations . . .?" 

At this instant her lady companion came to announce that 
the prince was in the drawing-room. 

* Tell him I will not see him; I am very angry with him for 
not keeping his word. . . .” 

*Oh! countess, every sinner hopes for mercy!" exclaimed 
a fair man with marked features, who now appeared in the 
doorway. 

The elder lady rose and made a respectful curtsey, of which 
the new-comer did not take any notice; she glanced at her 
daughter and majestically quitted the room. “She is right,” 
said the princess to herselí—her scruples had melted in the 
presence of his serene highness: “Yes, quite right. Why, did 
we never think of such things when we were young? And it 
is so simple, too!" and she got into her carriage. 


By the beginning of August Helen's affairs were settled, and 
she wrote to her husband—who was so fond of her—a letter 
announcing her intention of marrying N., and her conversion 
to the true faith. She also requested him to carry out the 
formalities needed for the divorce, and which the bearer of 
her note was competent to explain to him. ‘So, praying to 
God to have you in his holy and mighty keeping, I remain, 
your friend. HELEN." 


This note reached Peter's house in.Moscow on the day of the 
battle of Borodino. 


86 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


CHAPTER XXIX 


For the second time since the fighting had begun Peter fled 
from the battery with the soldiers as far as Kniazkow. As he 
crossed the hollow he went past the ambulance tents; but, seeing 
nothing but blood, and hearing nothing but shrieks and groans, 
he ran off as fast as he could. He wanted one thing only: to 
forget as soon as possible all the dreadful scenes he had gone 
through, to relapse into the groove of common life, and find 
himself in his room and in his bed; there alone, he knew, could 
he ever get a clear idea of all he had seen and felt. 

But how was he to get there? Balls and shells were not 
singing along the road he was going, it is true; but at every 
yard he came on fresh scenes of suffering; he saw the same 
figures, exhausted or dully indifferent, and in the distance he 
could still hear the angry growl of musketry. 

He walked about three versts on the way to Mojaisk, and 
then sat down choked with dust. Night was falling, and the 
roar of cannon had ceased. Peter, resting his head on his hand, 
remained a long time watching the shadowy figures that filed 
past him in the dark; at every moment he fancied that a ball 
was dropping on him, and he started and half rose. He never 
knew how long he had been there, when, in the middle of the 
night, he was roused from his lethargy by three soldiers, who 
lighted a fire close to him and put on their pot. They crumbled 
their biscuit into it, and stirred in some dripping, and a savoury 
odour of frying mingled with the wood-smoke that rose from 
the camp-stove. Peter sighed, but the men paid no heed to 
him, and went on talking. 

“And who are you?” asked one of them, suddenly addressing 
him; he wished no doubt to convey that they would give him 
a share of their mess if he could prove himself worthy of it. 

“I!” said Peter, “I am a militia officer; but my detachment 
is not here—I lost it on the field.” 

“Hm!” said one of the men, and another shook his head. 
“Well, here, have some if you like!” and he handed to Peter 
the wooden ladle which he had just been eating with. Peter 
went up to the fire and ate with a will; he never had thought 
anything better. While he swallowed large spoonfuls of the 
stew the soldier sat staring at his face, lighted up by the blaze. 
* Where are you going to, tell me that?” 

“To Mojaisk.” 


87 


WAR AND PEACE 


“Then you are a gentleman?” 

« Yes." 

* What is your name?" 

“Peter Kirilovitch." 

“Well, Peter Kirilovitch, we will go with you if you like,” 
—and they set out together. 

It was cock-crow before they reached Mojaisk and slowly 
climbed the steep hill. Peter, in his bewilderment, had entirely 
forgotten that his inn was at the bottom of the street, and 
might never have remembered it if he had not happened to 
meet his servant, who was wandering about looking for him. 
He recognised his master by his white hat visible in the gloom: 

“Excellency!” he cried, ‘we could not think what had 
become of you. Are you walking? Why, where are you going? ~ 
Come this way." 

“To be sure!" said Peter, stopping short. The soldiers 
stopped too. 

“Hallo! so you have found your people?” said one of them. 
* Well, good-bye, Peter Kirilovitch." 

“Good-bye!” said they all in chorus. 

“Good-bye,” said Peter, turning back—"'I ought to give 
them something, perhaps," he thought, putting his hand into 
his pocket. ''No, it is of no use," said a voice within him. 

The inn rooms were all full, so Peter went to sleep in his 
travelling-chariot. 


CHAPTER XXX 


Harpy had he laid his head on the cushion than he fell asleep; 
suddenly, with a vividness that seemed almost real, he heard 
the thunder of guns, the flight of shells, the groans of wounded 
men; he even smelt blood and powder, and was seized with 
irrational panic. He opened his eyes and raised his head. All 
was quiet. An orderly was standing outside talking to the 
inn-porter; just overhead, in an angle formed by the roughly 
squared beams of the coach-house, a party of pigeons scared by 
his moving were flapping their wings; and the strong smell 
of hay, tar, and manure wafted vague suggestions of peace 
and rustic toil. 

“Oh! thank God it is over; what a shameful thing is fear, 
and what a disgrace to me to have given way to it! And they 


88 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


—they stood firm and cool to the last moment.” “They” were 
the soldiers—the men in the battery, the men who had given 
him food, the men he had seen praying to the holy image. In 
his imagination they stood out, apart from other men. 

* Ah! to be a soldier, a private!" thought Peter, “to live 
that life in common, to throw myself into it heart and soul, to 
feel and understand what they feel! But how can I get rid of 
the infernal and useless burthen that weighs upon me? I 
might have done so some time ago; I might have run away from 
my father's house; even after my duel with Dologhow. I might 
have become a soldier!" and his thoughts went back to the 
dinner at the club, to Dologhow's insult, to his meeting with 
the “Benefactor,” at Torjok. And then he saw a solemn lodge 
meeting. This lodge was held in the English club. And some- 
one very dear to him is seated at the end of the table. But 
it is he! The Benefactor! But he is dead, thought Peter. 
Yes, he is dead, and I never knew he was alive. How sorry 
I am that he is dead, and how glad that he is alive again! On 
one side of the table sat Anatole, Dologhow, Nesvitsky, Denissow 
and others (all as vivid in his dreams as those he called “they "), 
and these people, Anatole, Dologhow, shouted and sang loudly, 
but through their noise could be heard the voice of the Bene- 
factor. ceaselessly talking, and the sound of his words was as 
uninterrupted and full of meaning as the hum on the battle- 
field, but very pleasant and comforting. Peter did not under- 
stand what he was saying, but he knew that the Benefactor 
spoke of charity, of the possibility of being like “they.” And 
on all sides “they” with their kindly, simple faces surrounded 
the Benefactor. But though they were kind they did not look 
at Peter and did not know him. He wanted to attract their 
attention, to speak and as he raised himself he uncovered his 
legs which felt cold. When he again woke the blue twilight of 
dawn was peeping in under the roof, and a slight frost was 
sparkling on the beams outside. “Daylight already!” thought 
Peter, and he went to sleep again, hoping to find comprehension 
of the words that the ‘‘Benefactor” had spoken in his last 
dream. They had made so strong an impression on him that he 
remembered them long after, and he felt all the more convinced 
that they had been actually spoken to him because he did not 
feel himself capable of giving such a form to his ideas. "'The 
most difficult thing in life is to submit one’s freedom to the will 
of God,” said the mysterious voice. "'Singleheartedness consists 
in submission to the will of God, and 'they' are singlehearted. 


89 


WAR AND PEACE 


They do not argue, they act. Speech is silver, silence is gold—so 
long as man dreads death he is a slave; he who does not dread 
it is lord of all. If there were no such thing as suffering man 
would know no limits to his own will—he would not know 
himself. . . ." He was still murmuring incoherent words when 
his servant called him and asked if he should put the horses to. 

The sun was shining full in Peter’s face. He glanced across 
the yard, which was full of mud and muck, with a well in the 
middle; round the well stood soldiers, giving water to weary 
horses harnessed to carts which were now quitting the inn- 
yard one after another. Peter turned away with a revulsion of 
feeling, closed his eyes, and rolled over on the cushions of his 
chariot. “No,’ he thought, “I will not behold all these 
hideous objects; I want to follow out the things revealed to 
me in my sleep. One moment more, and I should have under- 
stood! What is to be done now?” And he was horrified to 
perceive that all that had seemed so clear and satisfactory in 
his dream had vanished. So he got up, on hearing from his 
servant and the gate-keeper that the French were advancing on 
Mojaisk, and the inhabitants quitting the town. He ordered 
his man to follow him with the carriage, and went forward on 
foot. The troops were in full retreat, leaving behind them 
10,000 wounded, who were to be seen on all sides in the streets, 
and the courtyards, and at the windows of the houses. Nothing 
was to be heard but lamentations and oaths. Peter, meeting a 
wounded general of his acquaintance, offered him a seat in his 
carriage, and they went on together towards Moscow. On his 
way Peter was informed that both his brother-in-law and Prince 
Andrew were among the slain. 


CHAPTER XXXI 


HE got into Moscow on the night of the 3oth August (September 
roth); he had hardly passed the city gate when he was met by 
an aide-de-camp of the governor's. 

* We have been looking for you everywhere," said the officer, 
"the count wants to speak with you on a matter of importance, 
and begs you will go to him at once." Peter sent his carriage 
home, and himself took a hackney coach, in which he drove to 
the governor's residence; Rostopchine himself had just come 
in from the country. The ante-room was full of people. Vas- 


90 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


siltchikow and Platow had seen Rostopchine, and had assured 
him that it was impossible to defend Moscow, and that the city 
must be left in the hands of the enemy. Although this was 
still kept a secret from the inhabitants, the civil functionaries 
and heads of departments had come to ask for orders from the 
governor so as to escape responsibility. At the moment when 
Peter entered the ante-room a courier from the army came 
out of Rostopchine’s private room. To the questions which 
besieged him this officer only replied by a gesture of despair, 
and he hurried through the room without stopping. Peter 
gazed with tired eyes on the various groups of officials, civil 
and military, old and young, who were waiting their turn; 
they were all anxious and agitated, He went up to two who 
were talking together, and whorn he happened to know. After 
a few commonplace remarks the conversation resumed its 
Course. 

“Tt is impossible to answer for anything in the present state 
of affairs," said one. 

“And yet he has just written such words as these,” said the 
other, holding vp a printed paper. 

“That is quite a different thing! That is for the populace.” 

“What is it?” asked Peter. 

“Took at it. It is his last poster." 

Peter took it and read it. 

“His highness, the commander-in-chief, with a view to 
effecting an earlier junction with the force advancing to meet 
him, has traversed Mojaisk and taken up a strong position 
where the enemy will not find it easy to attack him. Forty- 
eight cannon with ammunition have been sent to him from 
here, and his highness declares that he will defend Moscow to 
the last drop of his blood, and is ready to fight even in the 
streets of the city. My friends, do not let the closing of the 
courts of law occasion any alarm; it was necessary to remove 
them beyond all danger. The scoundrel will find someone 
here to talk to him, all the same! When the moment is come 
I shall call on the brave youth of town and country alike. 
Then I shall shout forth a ringing war-cry; till then I am silent. 
A hatchet is a good weapon, a boar-spear is a better; best of all 
is a pitchfork, and a Frenchman is no heavier than a sheaf of 
rye. ‘To-morrow afternoon our Lady of Iverskaia will be carried 
to visit the wounded in St. Catherine's Hospital. They will be 
sprinkled with holy water, and get well all the sooner. I am 
well. Ihave had a bad eye, but I can see out of both now." 


91 


WAR AND PEACE 


“But military authorities have assured me,” said Peter, 
“that fighting in the town is out of the question, and that the 
position . . .” 

“That is exactly what we were saying," observed one of his 
friends. 

* And what does this mean about his eye?" 

“The count had a stye in his eye," said an aide-de-camp, 
*and was annoyed when I told him that there had been in- 
quiries made as to his health. By the way, count," added the 
officer, with a smile, *we heard you had been going through a 
domestic crisis, and that your wife the countess . . ." 

“I know nothing about her," said Peter, with indifference. 
* What have you heard?" 

“Oh! so many things are invented, you know; I only repeat `~ 
what I hear said. They say . . ." 

“Well, what do they say?” 

“That your wife is going abroad.” 

“Very possibly,” said Peter, looking about him inattentively. 
“Who is that man?” he added, pointing to a tall old man, 
whose white eyebrows and beard were in strong contrast to his 
florid complexion. 

“He? Oh, he is an eating-house keeper, named Vérestcha- 
guine. Do not you know the story of the proclamation? " 

“Ts that the man?" said Peter, looking at the resolute calm 
face, which was certainly not suggestive of treason. 

* He did not write the proclamation; it was his son, who is 
in prison, and I fancy will not get off cheap! . . . It is a very 
complicated story. The proclamation was brought about 
two months since. The count had it inquired into. Gabriel 
Ivanovitch, here, was in charge of the matter; the paper had 
been passed on from hand to hand. ‘Where did you get it?’ 
he asked a man. ‘I had it from so and so.’ Off he went to 
the person named, and so by degrees traced it back to Vérestcha- 
guine, an innocent-looking youth, who was asked who had 
given it to him. We knew perfectly well that he could only 
have had it from the head of the post-office, and it was quite 
clear that they had a secret understanding. ‘No one,’ says 
he, ‘I wrote it myself? He was threatened and coaxed, but 
nothing would make him tell a different story. 

“Then the count sent for him: ‘Where did you get that 
proclamation?’ ‘I wrote it myself! You may fancy what a 
rage the governor was in; but you must allow that such an 
obstinate lie was enough to provoke him." 


92 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


“Yes, I understand,” said Peter. “What the count wanted 
was that they should betray Alutcharew!” 

“Not at all, not at all,” said the aide-de-camp, somewhat 
scared. ‘‘Klutcharew had other sins on his conscience, and 
for those he was dismissed. However, to return to the story, 
the count was furious. ‘How could you have written such a 
thing? It is a translation, for here is the Hamburg paper that 
contains it; and, what is more, you have translated wrongly, 
for you do not know French! Simpleton!’ ‘No,’ says he, 
‘I did not read it in a newspaper; I wrote it myself.’ ‘If that 
is the case, you are a traitor, and I will have you tried; then 
you will hang for it.’ 

“There the matter stuck. The count sent for the old man, 
and he answered as his son had done. Judgment was given; 
he was condemned, I believe, to penal servitude, and the old 
man has come to ask for his pardon. He is a thorough black- 
guard, a spoilt rascal, and a loose fish in every way; he has 
picked up a little learning somewhere, and thinks himself a cut 
above everybody. His father keeps an eating-house near the 
Stone Bridge; there is a picture representing God the Father 
holding a sceptre in one hand, and the world in the other. 
Well, would you believe it, he has moved it to his own house, 
and a wretched painter . . .” 


CHAPTER XXXII 


The aide-de-camp had reached this point in his narrative, 
when Peter was called to go into the governor’s room. At the 
moment when Peter entered Count Rostopchine was passing 
his hand over his frowning brow and eyes. 

“Ah! good-day, doughty warrior!” said he. “We have 
heard of your deeds of prowess; but they are not in print at 
this moment. Now, between you and me, my dear fellow, are 
you a freemason?” he added, in a stern tone, conveying at 
once reproof and forgiveness. 

Peter made no answer. 

“My information is trustworthy," Rostopchine went on. 
* Xowever, there are, I know, masons and masons; and I only 
hope you are not one of those who are ruining Russia under 
pretext of saving humanity." 


99 


WAR AND PEACE 


“T am a mason,” Peter said. 

* Well, my dear fellow, you know I suppose that Messieurs 
Spéransky and Magnitzky have been sent—you can guess 
where—with Klutcharew, and a few others, whose avowed 
object was the establishment of Solomon's Temple and the 
destruction of the National Church. You may be very sure 
that I should not have dismissed the postmaster if he had not 
been a dangerous man. Now, I know that you smoothed his 
journey for him by giving him a carriage, and that he left some 
important documents in your hands. I have a great regard 
for you; you are younger than I am, so listen to my paternal 
advice: break off with that set, and take yourself off as fast as 
you possibly can." 

* But what was Klutcharew's crime?" asked Peter. ~ 

“That is my business, and not yours!” exclaimed Rostopchine. 

“He is accused of having diffused Napoleon’s proclamations. 
But it was not proved,” Peter went on, without looking at the 
count. “And Vérestchaguine . . .” 

“Ah! There you are!” interrupted Rostopchine, in a rage. 
“Vérestchaguine is a traitor, and will get what he deserves. 
I did not send for you to pass judgment on my actions, but 
to advise you—or to order you, if you will have it so—to leave 
as soon as possible, and break off all connection with Klutcharew 
& Co.” Then, feeling that he had spoken too hotly to a man 
who was in his own eyes perfectly guiltless, he took his hand, 
and changed his tone. “We are on the eve of a public catas- 
trophe, and I have no time for civil speeches to all who come to 
speak to me; my brain is ina whirl. Well, my friend, and what 
will you do?" 

“Nothing,” said Peter, without looking up, but he seemed 
anxious. 

“Take a friend's advice, my dear fellow; make off as soon as 
you can: that is all I have to say to you. A word to the wise, 
you know. . . . Good-bye. By the way, is it true that the 
countess has fallen into the clutches of the reverend fathers of 
the Society of Jesus?" 

Peter did not answer, but left the room, looking gloomy and 
annoyed. 

At his own house he found several people waiting to see him, 
the secretary of a committee, the colonel of a battalion, his 
steward, his bailiff, and others. Everyone had something to 
ask him. Peter could not take in what they said, he felt no 
interest in their business, and only answered their questions in 


94 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


order to get rid of them. When at last he was left alone, he 
opened his wife's letter, which was lying on his table. 

“Singleness of heart consists in submission to the will of 
God. They are an example of this," thought he after reading 
it. “We must learn to forget, and to understand! So my 
wife means to marry someone else. . . ." He threw himself 
on his bed, and instantly fell asleep without even undressing. 

When he woke he was told that a police agent had come from 
Count Rostopchine to inquire whether he had left; also that 
several persons were asking to see him. Peter made a hasty 
toilet, and then, instead of going into the drawing-room, he 
went down the back stairs, and out at the carriage-gates. 
From that moment till after the burning of Moscow he disap- 
peared, and in spite of every inquiry no one saw him, or could 
discover what had become of him. 


CHAPTER XXXIII 


THE Rostows did not leave Moscow till the 13th, the day before 
the enemy entered the city. 

The countess had been absolutely panic-stricken after Pétia 
had joined the Obolensky Regiment of Cossacks, and started 
for Biélaia-Tserkow. The thought that both her sons were 
engaged in the war, and liable to be killed, gave her not a 
moment's peace. She first tried to persuade Nicholas to return; 
then she proposed to fetch Pétia, and place him in safety at 
St. Petersburg, but both schemes failed. Nicholas, whose last 
letter had described his unexpected meeting with Princess 
Maria, gave no further sign of life for a long time; this added 
to the countess's terrors, and she ceased to sleep at all. The 
count racked his brain to soothe her anxiety, and succeeded in 
getting his youngest son transferred from the Obolensky Regi- 
ment into Bésoukhow's company, which was being formed at 
Moscow; at this the countess was enchanted, and looked forward 
to watching over her Benjamin. So long as only Nicholas was 
in danger, she had fancied that she loved him best of all her 
children, and had reproached herself bitterly for favouritism; 
but when the youngest—that idle monkey Pétia, with his 
mischievous, bright eyes, his rosy, downy cheeks, and snub 
nose—was suddenly taken from her, to live among rough, 
coarse soldiers, who were fighting and killing, and being killed, 


95 


WAR AND PEACE 


she imagined it was he that was her darling, and could think of 
nothing but the moment when she should see him once more. In 
her impatience even those nearest and dearest to her only 
irritated her nerves: “I only want Pétia," she would say to 
herself. ‘‘What do I care for others?” 

A second letter came from Nicholas at the end of August, but 
it did not soothe her anxiety, though he wrote from Voronége, 
whither he had been sent to buy horses. Knowing that he was 
for the time out of danger, her alarms for Pétia increased. 
Almost all their acquaintance had left Moscow and urged the 
countess to follow their example as soon as possible. Still, she 
would not think of moving before the return of her darling 
Pétia, who came at last, on the oth. But, to her great surprise, 
the officer of sixteen seemed little touched by his mother’s 
extravagant and morbid devotion: she took good care not to 
let him suspect her purpose of never allowing him to fly again 
from beneath her maternal wing. Pétia, however, was in- 
stinctively aware of it, and to guard himself against being 
moved by it—‘‘against being made a molly of," he said—he 
returned her demonstrative caresses with elaborate coolness, 
kept out of her way, and spent most of his time with Natacha, 
to whom he had always been fondly attached. 

The count’s easy-going indolence was the same as ever; on 
the gth, the day fixed for their start, nothing was ready, and 
the conveyances sent to fetch them from the country-houses at 
Riazan and the neighbourhood of Moscow never arrived till the 
11th. From the oth till the 12th all Moscow was in a state of 
feverish excitement; day after day thousands of carts came in 
bringing in the wounded from Borodino, or went out carrying 
the townsfolk and all they were able to take with them, meeting 
at the gates of the city. In spite of Rostopchine’s declarations 
—or perhaps by reason of them—the most extraordinary 
rumours were afloat. It was said that everyone was forbidden 
to leave the capital, or, on the other hand, that the sacred 
images and relics had been placed in safety, and that the 
inhabitants were to be forced to go; or, again, that a battle 
had been fought and won since Borodino; it was also asserted 
that the army had been cut to pieces; that the militia were to go 
to the Three Hills, the clergy at their head; that the peasants 
were in revolt; that some traitors had been arrested, and so 
forth. They were all false reports, but those who left and those 
who remained were equally convinced that Moscow must be 
abandoned (in spite of the fact that the council of Fili at which 


96 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


it was decided to abandon Moscow had not taken place yet), 
and that there was nothing for it but to fly and save what they 
could. It was felt that a total smash was imminent; however, 
till the 12th there was no conspicuous change; Moscow by sheer 
force of habit lived its usual life, as a criminal stares about him 
on the way to the gallows, in spite of the catastrophe which was 
about to shake it to its very foundations. 

These three days were spent by the Rostows in the fuss and 
bustle of packing. While the count was running about to pick 
up news and make vague general plans for leaving, the countess 
superintended the sorting of their effects, always at the heels of 
Pétia, who tried to keep out of her way, always jealous of 
Natacha, from whom he could not be parted. Sonia was the 
only member of the family who set to work to pack with care and 
intelligence. For some time she had been sad and depressed. 
Nicholas’ letter, in which he spoke of his interview with Princess 
Maria, had been enough to fill his mother’s head with hopes 
which she had not tried to make a secret of before Sonia, for she 
regarded their meeting as a direct dispensation of God. “I 
never was particularly happy,” she said, “to think of Natacha's 
marrying Bolkonsky, while I have always longed to see Nicholas 
married to Princess Maria, and I have a presentiment that it 
will take place. That would be a happy thing!” And poor 
Sonia was forced to admit that she was right, for was not a 
rich marriage the only means of raising the fallen fortunes 
of the Rostows? 

Her heart was full, and to divert her mind from her sorrow, 
she had undertaken the tiresome and fatiguing work of the 
move; in fact the count and countess referred to her when any 
orders were to be given. Pétia and Natacha, on the contrary, 
did nothing to help, but got in everyone's way and hindered 
progress. Then shouts of laughter and flying steps were to be 
heard all over the house. They laughed without knowing why, 
simply because they felt light-hearted and everything provoked 
laughter. Pétia, who had been but a boy when he left home, 
gloried in having come back a young man; and he gloried even 
more in having been brought from Biélaia-Tserkow, where there 
was not the smallest hope of a fight, and in being at Moscow, 
where he would be sure to smell powder. Natacha was gay 
because she had too long been sad, and there was nothing at 
this moment to remind her of her grief, and because she had 
recovered her former brilliant health; nay, and they were gay 
because war was at the gates of the city, and fighting was close 


97 


WAR AND PEACE 


at hand; because arms were being given out, because there 
were plunderers about, people going and coming, bustle and 
excitement, and the stir of extraordinary events, which always 
produces high spirits, especially in the very young. 


CHAPTER XXXIV 


By Saturday, the 12th September, everything was topsy-turvy 
in the Rostows’ house: doors were set open, furniture packed 
or moved from its place, looking-glasses and pictures taken 
down, every room littered with hay, paper, and cases, which 
the servants and serfs were carrying away with slow heavy- 
steps; the courtyard was full of carts and chariots, some loaded 
and corded, others waiting empty, while the voices of the busy 
and numerous household echoed in every corner of the house 
and yard. The count was out; the countess, who had a sick 
headache as a result of all the noise and turmoil, was sunk in 
an arm-chair in one of the drawing-rooms, bathing her forehead 
with vinegar and water. Pétia had gone off to see a comrade, 
with whom he hoped to exchange from the militia into a 
marching regiment. Sonia was in the big drawing-room, 
superintending the packing of china and glass, while Natacha 
sat on the floor in her own dismantled room in the midst of a 
heap of gowns, ribbons and sashes, with an out-of-fashion ball 
dress on her lap, which she could not take her eyes off—it was 
that which she had worn at that first ball at St. Petersburg. 
She had been vexed with herself for being idle in the midst of all 
this excitement, and several times in the course of the morning 
she had tried to do something to help, but it was work that 
bored her, and she had always been incapable of doing any 
kind of work that did not captivate her, heart and soul. So 
after a few futile attempts, she had left the glass and crockery 
to Sonia, to arrange her own belongings. At first she feund 
this amusing enough, giving away gowns and frippery to the 
maids; but when it came to packing everything she was soon 
tired. 

“You will do it all for me, as nicely as possible, won't you, 
Douniacha?" said she; and sitting down on the floor, she 
fixed her eyes on the old ball dress, and fell into a reverie that 
carrled her far back into the past. 

She was roused by the voices of the maids in an adjoining 


98 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


room, and the noise of steps on the back stairs. She rose and 
looked out of the window. A long train of wounded soldiers 
had drawn up in front of the house. The women-servants, 
footmen, and grooms, the housekeeper, and the nurse—all the 
household, in short—crowded out to look at them. Natacha, 
throwing a pocket handkerchief over her head, and holding the 
corners under her chin, went out, too, into the street. The old 
housekeeper, now pensioned off, Mavra Kouzminichna, went a 
short way from the little crowd in front of the gate, to a telega 
with an awning of bast mats thrown over it, in which a pale 
young officer was lying. Natacha shyly followed to hear what 
she was saying to him. 

“Have you no friends in Moscow?” asked the old woman. 
“You would be so much more comfortable in a room ;/here, for 
instance—we are all going." 

*But would they allow it?" said the wounded man in a 
weak voice. “You must ask the officer in charge." And he 
pointed to a stalwart major a few paces off. 

Natacha gave the sick man a scared look, but went straight 
up to the major. 

“Can these wounded men stay in our house?” she asked. 

“Which is the one you wish to have, miss?” said the officer, 
with a smile, raising his hand to his cap. 

But Natacha quietly repeated her question; her face and 
manner were so serious that, in spite of the quaintness of her 
appearance with the handkerchief thrown over her hair, the 
major ceased to smile. 

“Certainly; why not?” 

Natacha bowed slightly, and went back to the old woman, 
who was still talking to the wounded lad. 

* Yes, they may, they may,” said Natacha, in a low voice. 

The wagon in which the young officer was lying at once 
turned into the courtyard, and half a score or more men were 
taken into houses in the neighbourhood. This incident, so 
completely out of the daily monotony of life, was delightful to 
Natacha, who made as many of the wagons come into the 
yard as it could hold. 

“But, my dear, you must ask your father,” said the old 
housekeeper. 

“Ts it worth while?” said Natacha. “It is only for one day, 
and we can surely go into the drawing-room and give them 
our rooms!” 

“Oh! miss, that is just like one of your notions! Why, 


99 


WAR AND PEACE 


even if we put them in the servants’ rooms we cannot do it 
without leave.” 

“Well, I will ask.” 

Natacha flew into the house and went on tip-toe into the 
drawing-room, where there was a strong smell of vinegar and 
ether. 

“Mamma, are you asleep?” 

“How can I sleep?” cried the countess, who had, however, 
been dozing. 

“Mamma, sweet little angel!” exclaimed Natacha, kneeling 
down by her side and laying her cheek against her mother’s. 
“I beg your pardon for waking you, and I will never do it 
again. But Mavra Kouzminichna sent me to ask you. There 
are some wounded men here, men and officers, will you allow 
them to come in? They do not know where to take them, and 
I was sure you would "—she ran on, all in a breath. 

"What? what officers? Who has been brought here? I 
do not understand?” said the countess. 

Natacha began to laugh and her mother smiled. 

“I knew you would be quite willing, and I will go and say so 
at once!” She jumped up, kissed her mother, and darted off; 
but in the next room she ran against her father, who had just 
come in, brimful of bad news. 

“We have dawdled about too long!” he began, angrily. 
“The club is closed, and the police are moving out.” 

“Papa, you will not be vexed at my having allowed the 
wounded men. . .” 

“To be sure not," said the count vaguely. “That is not 
the point; you will have the goodness, each and all of you, to 
have done with idle nonsense and to pack, for we must be off 
to-morrow, and as fast as possible.” And the count repeated 
his instructions to everyone he met. 

At dinner Pétia reported what he had heard: during the 
morning the people had fetched arms from the Kremlin, and in 
spite of Rostopchine’s declarations that he would give the 
alarm two days beforehand, it was known in the town that 
orders had been issued that everyone should go in a body next 
day to the Three Hills, where there was to bea desperate fight. 
The countess looked at the boy’s eager face with dismay, 
knowing that if she begged him not to go he would answer with 
something about being a man, honour, country, some extrava- 
gant absurdity that would be fatal to her hopes; so, thinking 
she might yet induce Pétia to leave town with them, as their 


100 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


protector, she said nothing. After dinner, however, she be- 
sought her husband, with tears in her eyes, to start if possible 
that very evening; and with the artless cunning of affection she, 
who until this moment had been perfectly cool, assured him 
now that she should die of fright if they did not get away at once. 


CHAPTER XXXV 


Mrs. Scuoss, who had been to see her daughter, added to the 
countess’s terrors by the history of her experience. In the 
Miasnitskaia, outside a large spirit-store, she had been obliged 
to take a coach to escape from the drunken crowd, who were 
roaring and shouting all round her; and the driver had told 
her that the mob had staved in the barrels, having been ordered 
to do so. 

As soon as dinner was over all the family returned to their 
packing with vehement ardour. The old count hovered about 
between the house and the courtyard, hurrying the servants’ 
till he completely bewildered them. Pétia, too, gave orders 
right and left; Sonia lost her head, and did not know what 
to do first under the count’s contradictory instructions. The 
servants squabbled and shouted and hurried from room to 
room. But suddenly Natacha threw herself into the fray. At 
first her intervention was looked on with suspicion; no one 
thought she could be in earnest, so they would not attend to 
her; however, she persisted with a steadiness that convinced 
everyone that she really meant it, and at last got herself obeyed. 
Her first achievement, which cost her immense labour, but 
which made her authority paramount, was the packing of the 
carpets; the count had a very fine collection of Persian rugs and 
Gobelins tapestry. There were two large cases open before her, 
one containing these carpets, the other china-ware. There 
was still a quantity of porcelain to pack, and more was being 
brought out of closets and pantries: there was nothing for it 
but to pack a third case full, and one was to be fetched. 

“But look, Sonia," said Natacha, “we can get everything 
into these two cases.” 

* Impossible, miss,” said the butler, “we have tried already.” 

“Just wait, you will see.” And Natacha began taking out 
the plates and dishes that had been carefully packed in. “We 
must wrap the china-ware in the rugs,” she said. 


101 


WAR AND PEACE 


“But then we shall want three cases only for the rugs,” said 
the butler. 

“Wait, only wait," cried Natacha. “Look, we need not 
take that," and she pointed to the commoner Russian ware. 
“That is quite unnecessary, while that can go with the carpets,” 
and she pointed to a Dresden service. 

“Let it all alone," said Sonia reproachfully. “We can 
manage it all without you." 

*Oh! miss, miss!" lamented the butler. 

But in spite of their remonstrances Natacha decided that 
they need not take the old carpets or the common service; so 
she went on with her task, leaving out everything that was of 
no value, and packed all over again. By this arrangement 
everything worth saving found a place in the two cases; still, 
do what they would, the box of rugs could not be shut. Natacha 
determined not to be beaten, altered, pushed, and squeezed, 
and made the butler and Pétia—whom she had enlisted on this 
arduous service—weigh down the lid with all their strength. 

* You are right, Natacha, everything will go in if you take 
out one rug." 

“No, no, press with all your weight! Press hard, Pétia. 
Now, on:your side, Vassilitch!" and with one hand she wiped 
the perspiration from her face, while with the other she, too, 
threw all her weight upon the case. 

“Hurrah!” she suddenly exclaimed. The lid was closed, 
and Natacha clapped her hands in triumph, and tears sprang 
up in her eyes, but only for a second. Having thus conquered 
the distrust of the family she set to work at once on another 
box. Even the old count was resigned now when he was told 
that this or that arrangement had been made by Natacha 
Ilinichna. Still, in spite of their united efforts, the packing 
could not be finished that night; the count and countess, having 
definitely decided not to start till the morrow, went to their 
room; the girls lay down on sofas. 

That evening Mavra Kouzminichna admitted another wounded 
man into the house. She supposed, she said, that he must be 
an officer of high rank, though he was completely hidden by 
the hood and apron of his travelling-chaise. An elderly man- 
servant of great respectability rode on the box by the coachman, 
and a doctor and two orderlies followed in another carriage. 

_ “This way, if you please, the family are leaving at once and 
the house is as good as empty,” said the old woman to the 
servant. 


102 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


“God only knows whether he is still alive!” said the man. 
“We have our own house too in Moscow; but it is some distance 
off and there is no one in it.” 

* Come in, you are very welcome here. Is your master very 
bad?” The man gave a despairing shrug: 

“No hope,” he said, “but I must let the doctor know." 

He went to the second carriage. 

“Very good," said the doctor. 

The man peeped into the chariot, shook his head, and bid 
the coachman turn into the courtyard. 

“Merciful heaven!" exclaimed the housekeeper, as the 
carriage drew up, “carry him into the house; the family will 
not object—” and as it was important to avoid going upstairs 
they carried the wounded man into the left wing, to the rooms 
which Mrs. Schoss had occupied till to-day. 

The wounded officer was Prince Andrew Bolkonsky. 


CHAPTER XXXVI 


TE day of doom dawned on Moscow. It was a Sunday—a 
bright, clear autumn morning; the cheerful clang of bells from 
all the churches bid the faithful, as usual, to prayer. 

No one, even now, would allow that the fate of the city was 
sealed; the covert anxiety which was fermenting silently only 
revealed itself in the high prices asked for certain commodities, 
and the unusual number of the poorer class who were wandering 
about the streets. A crowd of factory workmen, peasants, and 
servants, soon to be joined by students, civil officials, and men 
of all grades, had begun at daybreak to make their way towards 
the Three Hills. Having reached this point the mob waited 
for Rostopchine; but when he did not arrive, being convinced 
that Moscow was about to be handed over to the enemy, they 
presently dispersed and found their way into the taverns and 
low resorts of the city. In the course of the day the price of 
weapons, carts, horses, and gold coin rose constantly and 
steadily; while paper-money and articles of luxury were to be 
had cheaper and cheaper as the hours passed. A wretched 
horse would be sold by a peasant for 500 roubles, while mirrors 
and bronzes were to be had for a mere trifle. 

The excitement and confusion that seethed outside was 
scarcely felt under the patriarchal roof of the Rostows. Three 


103 


WAR AND PEACE 


of their servants vanished, it is true, but nothing was stolen. 
The thirty vehicles brought in from the country were in them- 
selves worth a fortune, so scarce was every form of vehicle, 
and several people came to offer the count enormous sums for 
one of them. The courtyard was still crowded with soldiers 
sent in by officers who had found refuge in the neighbourhood, 
and with poor wounded creatures who implored the steward to 
ask the count to allow them to ride on a cart, just to get safe 
out of Moscow. Though he was moved to compassion by 
these helpless beings the steward gave the same answer to 
all: “He did not dare,” he said, “to trouble his master with 
such petitions. Besides, if he gave up one cart why not all, 
why not even his own carriages? Thirty carts would do 
nothing towards saving all the wounded, and in such a general 
catastrophe it was every man’s duty to think first of those 
nearest to him. . . .” 

The count had got up, had left his room on tiptoe so as not 
to disturb the countess, and had come out on the steps, where he 
presently became a conspicuous object in a violet silk dressing- 
gown. It was still very early; all the carriages were packed 
and standing outside; the steward was talking to an old military 
servant and a pale young officer with his arm in a sling. As 
the count came out Vassilitch sternly signed to them to go. 

“Well, is everything ready?" said the count, passing his 
hand over his bald head and bowing kindly to the officer and 
the orderly. 

"Nothing remains to be done, excellency, but to put the 
horses to." 

"Capital! the countess will wake presently and then by 
God's mercy ...! And you, gentlemen,” he went on, for he 
was always attracted by new faces, “you will find shelter, at 
any rate, under my roof." The young officer stepped forward; 
his face, white with pain, suddenly flushed. 

“Count, for God's sake let me find a corner in one of your 
baggage-wagons. I have nothing of my own, so I shall 
manage very well." 

He had not finished his sentence when the old orderly 
preferred the same request in the name of his master. 

* Of course, of course, only too glad,” said the count. **Vas- 
silitch just see that one or two of the wagons are unloaded— 
you see they are really wanted." And without explaining 
himself more clearly he looked another way. A bright look of 
gratitude lighted up the officer's face, while the count, much 


104 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


pleased with himself, looked round the courtyard. Wounded 
men were crowding in and the windows on both sides suddenly 
were lined with ghostly faces, looking at him with painful 
anxiety. 

*Would your excellency just step into the gallery," said 
Vassilitch uneasily. “Nothing has yet been settled about the 
pictures." 

The count went indoors, but he first repeated his instructions 
that the wounded were to be helped to get away. “After all, 
we may very well leave a few cases behind," said he in a low 
voice, as if he were afraid of being heard. 

The countess woke at nine, and Matrona Timofevna, a 
pensioned lady's-maid, who now fulfilled the duties of her 
domestic police agent, came to say that Mrs. Schoss’ was very 
angry, and that the young ladies’ summer dresses were being 
left behind. When the countess inquired as to the cause of 
Mrs. Schoss's wrath she was informed that it was because 
her trunk had been taken off one of the carts, and that other 
waggons were being unloaded and the cases piled in a corner 
of the yard, as the count had given orders that they were to 
carry wounded soldiers instead. 

The countess sent for her husband. 

“What is going on, my dear? They tell me that you are 
having the luggage unloaded." 

*[ was just coming to tell you, my dear. Well, the thing 
is, you see, little countess, some officers came and entreated 
me to lend some of the carts for the wounded. And all those 
things are not in the least necessary — what do you say? 
Besides, how can we leave them here, poor souls? We offered 
them shelter, you know, and I think that therefore we really 
ought ... Why not take them with us? But we need not 
decide in a hurry... .” 

The count had jerked out his broken explanation in a timid 
voice—the voice he spoke in when talking over money matters. 
His wife, who was used to it and knew it always precluded a 
confession of some great piece of extravagance, such as the 
building of a gallery in an orangery, or the arrangement of a 
party or of amateur theatricals, had made it a rule to thwart 
him whenever he asked for anything in that tone. So she put 
on a victimised air and spoke. 

“Listen to me, count. You have managed so cleverly that 
at last you are not to be trusted with a kopeck, and now you 
are doing your best to sacrifice what is left of your children's 


105 


WAR AND PEACE 


fcrtune. Did you not tell me yourself that our furniture and 
effects are worth a hundred thousand roubles? Well, my dear, 
I do not intend to leave it behind; you must do as you choose, 
of course, but not with my consent. It is the business of 
government to look after the wounded! Look over there, at 
the Loupoukhine’s house; they have carried away every stick. 
That is what anyone would do, with a grain of common sense! 
—-but we, we are idiots! Have mercy on your children if you 
have none on me!" 

The count hung his head and left the room, a melancholy man. 

* Papa, what is the matter?" asked Natacha, who had stolen 
into the room at her father's heels and heard the debate. 

*Nothing—nothing that concerns you," said her father. 

“But I heard it all, papa. Why does mamma refuse?” 

* What can it matter to you?" said the count crossly, and 
Natacha shrank back into a window-bay, disconcerted. 

“Papal” she exclaimed. “Here is Berg!” 


CHAPTER XXXVII 


Brno, the count’s son-in-law, now a colonel wearing the 
orders of St. Vladimir and St. Anne, still held his snug and 
pleasant post under the head of the staff of the second division. 
He had come to Moscow that very morning (the 1st (13th) 
September) without any particular motive. But as everyone 
was going to Moscow he did as everyone did, and asked leave 
“on private business.” Berg, who had driven up in his elegant 
droschky with two handsome horses—the counterpart of a pair 
he had seen belonging to Prince X—got out and crossed the 
courtyard, staring with much curiosity at the vehicles which 
crowded it. As he went up the steps he drew out a pocket- 
handkerchief of immaculate whiteness and tied a knot in it. 
Then, hastening his pace, he rushed into the drawing-room, 
threw himself on the count’s neck, kissed Natacha’s hand and 
Sonia’s, and eagerly asked after his “mamma.” 

“Who has time to think of health?" the count growled 
dolefully. “Tell us what is going on. Where are the troops? 
Is there to be a battle?” 

“God only knows, papa,” replied Berg. “The army is full 
of heroic spirit, and the generals are sitting in council; the 


106 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


result is not yet known. All I can tell you, papa, in general 
terms, is that no words can do justice to the really heroic 
valour displayed by the Russian troops in the fight of the 7th. 
I can tell you this, papa,” and he slapped his chest, as he had 
seen a general of his acquaintance do whenever he spoke of the 
Russian troops. “I can tell you frankly that we officers never 
once had to urge our men forward; it was with the greatest 
difficulty that we could keep back those—those. . .. Well, 
papa, they were really heroes of antiquity," he hastily con- 
cluded. ‘General Barclay de Tolly did not shirk risking his 
life; he was always in the front. As to our corps, which was 
placed on the slope of a hill, as you may imagine. . . ." And 
Berg went off into a long story, a compilation of all he had 
picked up from hearsay during the last few days. 

Natacha's eyes, fixed on his face as though seeking there the 
answer to some question in her own mind, visibly disturbed 
the speaker. “The conduct of the troops was heroic; it is 
impossible to laud it too highly," he repeated, trying to win 
Natacha’s good graces by a smile. “Russia is not in Moscow, 
but in the hearts of her children! eh, papa?" 

At this moment the countess entered the room; she looked 
tired and cross. Berg leaped to his feet, kissed her hand, 
asked her fifty questions about her health, shaking his head 
sympathetically. 

“Ah! yes, mamma, very true; these are cruel times for a 
Russian heart. But what are you uneasy about? You have 
plenty of time to get away." 

“T really cannot think what everyone is about," said the 
countess, turning to her husband. “Nothing is ready, no one 
gives any orders. It is enough to make one wish for Mitenka 
back again! There will be no end to it!” 

The count was about to reply, but he thought better of it, 
and made for the door. 

* Papa, I have a great favour to ask," said Berg, taking out 
his handkerchief as if to blow his nose and accidentally noticing 
the knot. 

df Ofumens 

“Yes. As I was passing the Youssoupow's house just now, 
the steward came running out to ask me to buy something. 
I had the curiosity to go in, and I found a very pretty chiffonier 
—you remember I daresay that Vera particularly wished for 
one, and that we even had quite a little quarrel over it. If 
you could imagine what a pretty thing it is . . ." Berg went 


107 


WAR AND PEACE 


on gleefully, as his thoughts went back to his elegant and well- 
kept little home, “full of little drawers, with a secret division 
in one of them—I should so like to take it to her as a surprise. 
—I saw a troop of serfs down in the courtyard; let me have 
one of them—I will give him a handsome pourboire and . . .” 

But the count frowned. “You must ask the countess,’ " said 
he drily. “I do not give the orders." 

“Of course, if it is not convenient, I can do without,” said 
Berg. “It was only because Vera . . .” 

“Devil take it. Devil take you all!” exclaimed the count, 
out of patience. ‘You are turning my brain among you, upon 
my soul you are!” and he left the room. 

The countess melted into tears. 

“Oh! the times are desperately hard," Berg began again. 

Natacha had followed her father, but a fresh idea struck her 
and she flew down the stairs four steps at a time. Pétia was 
on the outside steps, very busy distributing arms to all who 
were leaving Moscow. The carts were still standing there with 
the horses ready harnessed, but two had been unloaded, and in 
one of them an officer had ensconced himself with the help of 
his servant. 

“Do you know what it was about?” asked Pétia of his sister, 
alluding to the squabble between his parents. She did not 
answer. “I suppose it was because papa wanted to let the 
wounded men have the wagons,” the boy went on. “Vassili 
told me, and in my opinion . . .” 

“In my opinion,” exclaimed Natacha, suddenly flaring up as 
she looked at her brother, “it is so mean, so shameful, that it 
maddens me! Are we Germans?” 

She stopped, choked with sobs, and as no one was at hand on 
whom she could vent her passion, she hastily fled. 

Berg, seated by his mother-in-law, was pouring out a stream 
of respectful consolations, when Natacha, angry and tearful, 
rushed in, like a hurricane, and went resolutely up to her 
mother. 

“Tt is horrible, disgraceful!” she said. “You never can 
have given such an order, it is impossible!” Berg and the 
countess looked up quite scared. The count, who was at the 
window, said nothing. 

“Mamma, it is impossible! Do you know what is going on 
in the courtyard? They are to be left behind!” 

“What is the matter? Who are to be left?” 

“The wounded. Oh! mamma, it is not like you. Dear 


108 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


mamma, dear little dove of a mother, forgive me, I ought not 
to speak so—but what do we want with all those things?” 

The countess looked in the girl’s face, and understood the 
cause of her excitement, and of her husband’s bad temper; the 
count would not look round. 

“Well, well, do as you please—I do not prevent you,” said 
she, not yielding entirely. 

“Mamma, will you forgive me?” 

But the countess gentiy pushed her aside, and went to her 
husband. 

“My dear, settle it just as you like; have I ever inter- 
fered. . . .?" But she cast down her eyes like a criminal. 

“The eggs giving a lesson to the old hen!” said the count, 
and he kissed his wife with tears in his eyes while she hid her 
confusion on his shoulder. 

“Oh, papa! may we? And we shall have plenty of room 
for all that is necessary. . . ." The count nodded assent, and 
Natacha was gone, with one bound to the stairs, and another 
down into the courtyard. 

When she gave the order to unload the vehicles the servants 
could not believe their ears; they gathered round her and 
would not do it till the count told them that it was by their 
mistress's desire. Then they were no less convinced of the 
impossibility of leaving the wounded than they had been, a few 
minutes before, of the necessity of carrying away all the pro- 
perty, and they set to work with a will. The sufferers dragged 
themselves out of the rooms and crowded about the wagons 
with pale but satisfied faces. The good news soon spread to the 
surrounding houses, and all the wounded men in the neighbour- 
hood flocked into the Rostows’ courtyard. Many of them 
would have managed to find room among the trunks and cases, 
but, when once the unloading had begun, who could stop it? 
And after all, what matter whether the whole or only a part of 
the things were left behind? The yard was littered with half- 
open boxes, containing rugs, china, and bronzes—all that had 
been so carefully packed the day before; and everyone was busy 
trying to reduce the amount of luggage, so as to convey as many 
of the wounded as possible. 

“We still have room for four,” 
can have my cart.” 

“And take the one that has my trunks,” said the countess. 
“Douniacha can sit by me.” 

The order was immediately carried out, and some more 


) 


said the steward. “They 


109 


WAR AND PEACE 


wounded were sent for from two doors off. All the servants, 
and Natacha too, were in a state of extreme excitement. 

“How can we fasten on this case?” asked some men, who 
were trying to tie a certain box on to the back of a carriage. 
“Tt really wants a cart to itself!” 

“What is in it?” asked Natacha. 

“The books out of the library.” 

“Leave them; we don’t want them.” 

The britzska was quite full; there was not room even for Pétia. 

“He will ride on the box. You will go on the box, won’t 
you, Pétia?" 

Sonia meanwhile had never ceased toiling; but, unlike 
Natacha, she was putting the things in order that were to be 
left behind, writing labels for them, by the countess's desire, 
and doing her best to get as much taken as possible. 


CHAPTER XXXVIII 


AT last, by two in the afternoon the four carriages, packed and 
loaded, stood, horses and all, in a row in front of the steps; while 
the waggons full of wounded men made their way out of the 
courtyard. The travelling-chariot in which Prince Andrew 
was lying, caught Sonia's attention as she and her lady's-maid 
were busy trying to arrange a comfortable corner for the countess 
in the roomy carriage. 

“Whose is that chariot?” asked Sonia, putting her head out 
of the window. 

“Do not you know, miss?” said the woman. 

“Tt is the wounded prince—he spent the night here, and now 
he is coming on with us." 

“What prince? What is his name?" 

**It is Miss Natacha's old fiancé, Prince Andrew Bolkonsky,” 
said the maid, with a sigh. “He is dying, they say.” 

Sonia sprang out, and ran off to the countess, who was 
walking about the rooms, dressed for the journey, with her 
bonnet and shawl on, waiting till all the party should have 
assembled to close the doors, and to say a short prayer before 
starting. 

“Mamma,” said Sonia, "Prince Andrew is here, wounded 
and dying. He goes with us." 

The countess stared in astonishment. 

“Natacha?” was all she said. 

In her mind, as in Sonia’s, the fact had at first suggested but 


110 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


one idea; knowing Natacha as they both did, the feelings she 
must experience at this news were more present to them than 
the sympathy they had always felt for the prince. 

"Natacha knows nothing about it, as yet... . But his 
carriage is coming with ours, that is the thing," said Sonia. 

“ And he is dying, you say?” 

Sonia bowed her head, and the countess, clasping her in her 
arms, began to cry. 

“The ways of the Lord are past finding out," thought she. 
She felt that the omnipotent hand of Providence was plainly 
visible in all that was going on around her. 

“Well, mamma, is everything ready?” asked Natacha, 
gaily. “But what is the matter?” 

“Nothing. Everything is ready.” 

“Well, then, come——’” and the countess held her héad down 
to hide her tears. 

Sonia kissed Natacha, and Natacha looked inquiringly into 
her face. 

“What is it? What has happened?” 

“Nothing, nothing.” 

“Something wrong, and concerning me . . .?" asked Natacha, 
who was as susceptible as a sensitive plant. 

The count, Pétia, Mrs. Schoss, Mavra Kouzminichna and 
Vassilitch came into the drawing-room; the doors were shut, and 
all sat in silence.! In a few seconds the count rose, sighed 
deeply and crossed himself conspicuously in front of the holy 
image. All followed his example; he embraced Mavra Kouz- 
minichna and Vassilitch, who were to stay and take care of the 
house; while the two old servants seized his hand and kissed 
his shoulder, he patted them kindly on the back, bade them 
take care of themselves, and said good-bye with vague bene- 
volence. The countess had taken refuge in her room where 
Sonia found her, again on her knees in front of the images; 
though some of them had been removed, as the countess clung 
to those which were most precious as family heirlooms. 

At the entrance and in the courtyard, those who were leaving 
—their high boots pulled up over their trousers, their coats 
strapped round the waist with leather belts, armed with daggers 
and swords dealt out to them by Pétia—were taking leave of 
those who were to remain behind. As usual, at the last moment, 
several things had been forgotten or badly packed, and the two 


1Tt is an old Russian custom for all to sit down and keep silence for a 
few minutes before a journey. 


111 


WAR AND PEACE 


running Remar Seed Re a lag Gee ac dhe aes af Se 


carrage, ready te dep dhe coumess m, We Ge maud war 

sell rusting te amd te fe pDulows and garat at Sl sudes 
“They & forget ing." sam deanu “ie 

know verv Deuniacha, thac T ammat sb Re ams" Sa 


head. 


that had Deer WAS DUC Hh, ag TS wura He 
Qld cachinam he usual igjumceeas Fane x 


ee ES 
Slowly glide past. Freep te nes Ve ONE kat 
quit od tee wind andi kakat a tbe Inge lk aft ener S 

led the way-—Prime Amirew'S charme at ts ak «She had a 


idea of what that closed ew convened: Dut as iè was De ÈL 


ef the long line Ste Rept her eves Aet ae o 
tk 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


As they progressed endless files of the same kind turned out 
from so many of the cross streets that in the great high street 
—the Sadovaia—they formed two lines. In front of the 
Soukharew Tower, Natacha, who was eagerly watching the 
passers-by, suddenly exclaimed with joyful surprise: 

* Mamma, Sonia, it is he!” 

“Who? Who is it?” 

* Why, it is Bésoukhow—" and she leaned out of the window 
to make sure that she recognised a tall big man wearing a 
coachman’s caftan; it was easy to see at a glance that it was a 
disguise. Close behind him walked a little old man with a 
yellow, beardless face, wrapped in a cloak with a frieze collar. 

“It certainly is Bésoukhow," said Natacha. 

* What an idea! You are mistaken!" 

“I wil wager my head that it is he. Stop! Wait!" she 
cried to the coachman. 

But it was impossible to stop; the drivers of vehicles in both 
directions shouted to him to go on and not to check the tide of 
traffic. However, the Rostows could clearly make out the tall 
figure, though some way off; if it was not Peter it was some- 
one strangely like him. The person in question was walking 
on the footway, with his head bent and a grave face; the old 
man who looked like a servant, noticing the party in the carriage 
who were gazing at him so inquisitively, gently and respectfully 
touched his master's elbow. Peter, lost in thought, did not 
immediately understand what he wanted ; but presently looking 
round to the spot to which his aged companion was pointing, 
he caught sight of Natacha, and by an involuntary impulse 
ran towards the coach. He went about ten steps, and stopped 
short. Natacha, still leaning out, hailed him with a friendly 
smile. 

* Peter Kirilovitch, come here and speak to us. You really 
seem to know me again! It is very surprising that you should. 
And what are you doing in that queer costume?" she added, 
holding out her hand. 

Peter took her hand and kissed it awkwardly, walking along 
by the side of the carriage, for it had not been able to stop. 

* What is this?" said the countess, with kindly intent. 

*[—nothing. Why? Ask me no questions, pray,” he replied, 
feeling the bewitching charm of Natacha's bright face sinking 
into his soul. 

* Are you going to stay or to leave Moscow?” 

Peter was silent for an instant. 


115 


WAR AND PEACE 


“Moscow?” said he. “Yes, to be sure; I shall stay. 
Good-bye.” 

“How sorry I jam that I am not a man! I should have 
stayed with you,” said Natacha. “For you are right, I know. 
Mamma, if you would only let me stay. Ss 

* You were at the battle—you saw the fighting?” asked the 
countess, interrupting the girl. 

“Ves,” said Peter, *I was there. There will be another 
to-morrow.” 

“But what is wrong with you?” Natacha persisted. “You 
are not like your usual self.” 

“Oh! ask me no questions. I do not know—to-morrow. 
Not another word! Good-bye, good-bye!” he repeated. “What 
dreadful times . . .!” He let the coach pass on and got back ` 
to the footway; while Natacha still gazed after him with her 
friendly, but slightly satirical, smile. 


CHAPTER XXXIX 


PETER, since his disappearance two days ago, had been living 
in the rooms that had belonged to his deceased friend, Bazdéiew. 
This was what had happened. 

When he awoke that morning, after his interview with 
Rostopchine, he was for a few minutes bewildered to know 
where he was, or what was being said to him; but when his 
servant mentioned among the names of those who were waiting 
to see him, that of the Frenchman who had delivered his wife’s 
letter, one of those fits of gloom and despair to which he was 
so liable came over him with crushing weight. His brain was 
utterly bewildered and confused; he felt as if he had nothing 
left to do on earth—that his whole existence had crumbled into 
nothingness, and that life had come to a deadlock. Murmuring 
to himself with a forced smile, he sat on his sofa, altogether lost; 
now and then he peeped through the keyhole at the people wait- 
ing in the adjoining room, or took up a book and tried to read. 
His butler came a second time, to say that the French gentle- 
man urgently begged for an interview, if only for a few moments, 
and that a man had come from Mrs. Bazdéiew, who was obliged 
to go into the country, with a message begging him to take 
charge of her deceased husband’s library. 

“To be sure, of course—at once. Go and tell him I am 


114 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


coming, that will be best," said Peter; and as soon as the 
servant had left the room he snatched up his hat and slipped 
away by a back door. 

He met no one in the passage, and got down to the lower 
landing. There he saw the porter on guard at the front 
entrance, so he turned off down a back staircase leading to the 
courtyard, and stole across it unperceived. However, in going 
out of the carriage gate, he was obliged to go past the gate- 
keepers and coachmen in waiting, who all bowed respectfully. 
To escape their inquiring eyes, Peter did as the ostrich does, 
hiding its head in the sand; he looked away, and walked off as 
fast as he could go. 

On mature reflection it seemed to him that the most pressing 
need was to go and look over the papers and books which were 
entrusted to him. He called the first hackney-coach he met, 
and directed him to drive to the widow's house, near the 
“ Patriarch's Pools." He looked about him as he drove on, at 
the lines of conveyances carrying away fugitives; and he held 
on tightly, in order not to tumble out of his own ramshackle 
vehicle which jolted slowly along, creaking with rust; he felt 
as happy as a boy playing truant from school. He began to 
talk to the driver, who told him that arms were being distributed 
at the Kremlin, that all the populace were to be sent out on the 
morrow beyond the gate by the Three Hills, and that a great 
battle was to be fought there. When they reached the Pools, 
Peter had some difficulty in recognising the house, for he had 
not been there for some time. When he knocked at the door, 
Ghérassime, the little wrinkled old man whom he had first seen 
at Torjok five years since, opened the door. 

“Ts anyone at home?” asked Peter. 

*My mistress and the children have been compelled by 
circumstances to take refuge in their country-house at Torjok." 

“Let me go in all the same. I must look through the books." 

“Yes, come in, come in, sir. His brother—my master's, 
God rest his soul—is here still; but as you know, he is very 
feeble.” 

Peter also knew that he was halt idiotic, for he drank like a fish. 

* Well, let me see. . . ." said Peter, and he went into the 
ante-room, where he found himself face to face with a tall, bald, 
old man, shuffling about in a pair of slippers, with no stockings 
on, while his rubicund nose bore testimony to his habits. On 
seeing Peter he growled out a few dissatisfied remarks, and 
vanished down a dark passage. 


115 


WAR AND PEACE 


* A powerful mind once, but very feeble nowadays,” said the 
servant. “Will you come into the library?” 

Peter followed him. “Seals have been placed on everything, 
you see. Sophia Danilovna said we were to give you the books.” 

Peter was in the very room which, during the Benefactor’s 
lifetime, he had entered once with such anxious trepidation. 
Since the old man’s death the room had not been used, and the 
dust which lay on all the furniture made it look doubly forlorn. 
Ghérassime opened a shutter and went away. Peter went to a 
cabinet which contained various manuscripts, and took out a 
packet of very precious documents: the Constitution of the 
Scotch Lodges, ennobled and elucidated by Bazdéiew. He laid 
them out on the table, glanced over them, and then forgot 
everything in a brown study. 

Ghérassime opened the door and peered in once or twice, but 
found him still in the same attitude. Two hours slipped by; 
then the old servant allowed himself to make a little noise; but 
it was in vain, Peter heard nothing. 

“Ts your driver to be sent away?” asked Ghérassime, at 
length. 

* Ah! yes," exclaimed Peter, rousing himself. “Listen,” he 
added, holding the man by a button of his coat, and looking at 
him with moist and glistening eyes. There will be a fight 
to-morrow, you know. Do not betray me, and do as I tell you." 

“Very well," said Ghérassime, shortly. “Shall I bring you 
something to eat?" 

“No—I want something else. Bring me a complete peasant's 
outfit, and a pistol." 

“Very well," repeated Ghérassime, after a moment's thought. 

Peter spent the rest of the day alone in the library, walking 
up and down it incessantly; and the old servant heard him 
talking aloud to himself several times. At night he went to 
rest in a bed that had been made ready for him. Ghérassime, 
in a long life of service, had seen many strange things; so he 
was not particularly astonished by Peter's eccentricity, and was 
very well content to have someone to wait upon. He had got 
the peasant's coat and cap by the evening without any difficulty 
and promised to procure him the pistol next morning. The old 
drunken idiot came as far as the door of the room twice in the 
course of the evening, shuffling about with his shoes down at 
heel; he would stand a few minutes gaping at Peter, but as soon 
as Bésoukhow looked round he crossed the skirts of his dressing- 
gown over his shanks, and made off as fast as he could go. 


116 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


Peter, in his costume as a driver, was on his way to buy a 
pistol at the Soukharew Tower, with Ghérassime, when he met 
the Rostows. 


CHAPTER XL 


Durinc the night of September 13th, Koutouzow gave the 
order that the army was to retire through Moscow to the Riazan 
road. The march began at night; the first regiments led the 
way in good order, and without hurry; but when, at daybreak, 
they reached the Dorogomilow Bridge, and saw in front of 
them an innumerable multitude, crowding the bridge, covering 
the heights, and thronging the streets till progress was impos- 
sible; when, at the same time, they were hemmed in behind by 
a mass of men pushing them forward, the ranks were reduced 
to disorder. The soldiers rushed on to the bridge, to the fords, 
jumped into boats, and many of them even into the water. 
Koutouzow himself made his way across the town by the 
back streets. By ten in the morning, of the 14th, however, 
only the rear guard remained in the Dorogomilow suburb: 
the rest of the army had made its way across. 

At that same hour Napoleon, on horseback, in the midst of 
his troops, was standing on the Poklonnaia Hill and gazing 
at the splendid panorama before him. During the memorable 
and eventful week—from the battle of Borodino on the 7th, till 
the entrance of the enemy on the 14th—Moscow had enjoyed the 
lovely autumn weather, which is always taken with gratitude 
as an agreeable surprise; the sun, though low on the horizon, 
seems to fill the air with sparkling light, dazzling the eye and 
giving a more genial warmth than in the spring; the lungs 
expand and dilate as they inhale the perfumed breeze; the 
nights are not yet cold, and the darkness is made glorious by 
showers of golden stars—a mysterious splendour that frightens 
some and enchants others. 

On this day the morning light shed fairy-like beauty on 
Moscow. It lay at the foot of the hill, with its gardens, its 
churches, its river, its cupolas glistening like domes of gold, its 
fantastic and unique architecture—and everything looked as 
though life were moving there as usual. Napoleon, as he con- 
templated the scene, felt that mixture of uneasy curiosity and 

1 Salutation Hill, about two miles from Moscow on the Smolensk road. 


117 


WAR AND PEACE 


covetousness which stirs a conquerer as he stands face to face 
with unknown and alien types. He felt that this great city 
was instinct with life; nay, he could see ample evidence of 
that from the height on which he stood: it was as though he 
heard the panting breath of a vast living body. Every Russian 
heart as it turns to Moscow, idealises the old capital as a mother; 
and every foreigner, though its maternal attributes may come 
not to him, is struck by its essentially feminine character. 
Napoleon felt it. 

“This Eastern city with its numberless churches, Moscow 
the holy! At last I see the famous spot! It was time!” 
thought he; he dismounted, had the map of Moscow laid before 
him, and sent for his interpreter, Lelorme d’Ideville. , 

* A town held by an enemy is a dishonoured girl" he had 
said to Toutchkow at Smolensk. 

But as he admired the Oriental beauty, prone at his feet, it 
was chiefly in amazement at finding a dream realised which he 
had so long cherished, and thought so difficult of attainment. 
He was excited, almost tremulous, at the certainty of possessing 
her, and he looked about him comparing the details of the 
scene with the plan of the city. 

“There lies the proud capital, at my mercy! And where is 
Alexander, and what are his feelings?—I have but to speak 
the word—to give a sign—and the capital of the czars is 
destroyed for ever. But my clemency is always great to the 
conquered! I will be merciful. Messages of justice and con- 
ciliation shall be written on those ancient monuments of 
despotism and barbarism. I, sitting in the Kremlin, will dic- 
tate words of wisdom. From me they shall learn what true 
civilisation means, and future generations of Boyards will be 
obliged to remember the name of their conqueror with gratitude: 
‘Boyards’—I will say to them—“‘I do not wish to take advantage 
of my triumph to humiliate a sovereign I esteem; I will offer 
you terms of peace worthy of you and of my peoples!’ And 
my presence will elevate them, for I will speak plainly and 
magnanimously, as I always do.” 

“Bring me the Boyards!” he said aloud, turning to his staff; 
and a general officer rode off in search of them. 

Two hours went by ; Napoleon breakfasted, and then returned 
to the same spot to await the deputation. His address was 
prepared—a speech full of dignity and majesty, at least in his 
own opinion. Carried away by the generosity he intended 
heaping on the capital, he already saw himself in fancy in the 


118 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


palace of the czars, surrounded by the magnates of the Russian 
court meeting those of his own. He was appointing a prefect 
who should gain him the hearts of the people, distributing 
Jargess to the benevolent foundations of the town, thinking 
that—as in Africa he had felt it his duty to drape himself in 
a burnous, and perform his devotions in a mosque—so here 
he ought to be open-handed after the traditions of the czars. 

While he thus indulged his fancy, growing somewhat impatient 
at the delay in the arrival of the Boyards, his generals were 
debating in an undertone; for the emissaries charged to fetch 
these representatives had returned in consternation, announcing 
that the city was empty, that everyone was leaving. How 
was this news to be communicated to his majesty without 
making him ridiculous—the most disastrous issue conceivable? 
How was he to be told that, instead of the expected Boyards, 
there was not a soul to be found but the drunken mob? Some 
said that a deputation of some sort must be got together at any 
cost; others recommended that the emperor should be told 
the truth, with all circumspection and delicacy. It was a 
critical case. 

* Impossible!" said they. “And yet he must know it sooner 
or later.” But no one would be the first to tell him. 

Napoleon, who had been so long content to indulge in his 
dream of magnificence, felt at last, with the subtle instinct of 
an accomplished actor, that the situation was losing its solemnity 
by dint of sheer lengthiness. He gave a sign, and a cannon was 
fired. At this signal the troops assembled in front of Moscow 
rushed in through the various gates at a double quick march, 
outstripping each other in the midst of clouds of dust, while the 
streets rang with their deafening shouts. Napoleon, sympa- 
thising in their enthusiasm, rode forward as far as the Dorogo- 
milow Gate: there he stopped and dismounted, proceeding on 
foot, in confident expectation of meeting the deputation he 
had sent for. 


119 


WAR AND PEACE 


CHAPTER XLI 


Moscow was deserted. There was still a spasmodic semblance 
of life, no doubt; but it was practically empty and moribund, 
like a hive that has lost its queen. At a little distance it may 
still seem busy, but if you go close to it you cannot be deceived: 

this is not how it looks when the bees fly home to it; there is 
not the fragrance, the hum of life. A tap on the hive does 
not produce the general and immediate revolt of thousands of 
little creatures, curling themselves round to sting, buzzing and 
fluttering with rage, and filling the air with the stir of busy 
labour, though here and there, in its depths a feeble hum may 
be heard. At the entrance there is no heavy, aromatic scent 
of honey, no warm odour of gathered stores. No watchful 
guards are there, ready to give a trumpet call of warning, and 
then to sacrifice their lives in defending the commonwealth. 
There is no peaceful, regular toil betraying itself in a steady 
murmur; only a fitful and broken buzz. The working bees 
are no longer to be seen setting forth, light of wing, to forage 
in the fields for their fragrant booty; only thieving drones creep 
in and out, all clammy with stolen sweets. Instead of swarming 
bunches of honey-laden bees, clinging to each other, or brushing 
off the pellets of gathered wax, only a few torpid and half-dead 
insects are to be seen at the bottom of the hive, or wandering 
idly and vaguely about the fragile partitions. Where once 
there was a smooth floor, clean-swept by the fanning of their 
wings, the seams neatly caulked with wax, lie scattered crumbs 
of wax, broken ruins, a few dying creatures with legs still 
quivering, or corpses left unburied. The upper chambers are 
no less ruinous; the cells, built up with such exquisite skill, 

have lost their virgin beauty ; everything is desolate, crushed, 

and defiled. Robber wasps invade the abandoned works, and 
the dismayed inhabitants—shrivelled, limp and decrepit, drag 
themselves about, listless and hopeless, with scarcely a spark 
of life; while flies, hornets, and butterflies come fluttering or 
blundering round the ravaged treasury. Sometimes one or 
two may be found faithful to their old habits, cleaning out a 
cell and instinctively removing a dead bee, while, close by these, 
two others are fighting or encouraging each other in idleness. 
A few survivors, finding a feebler victim, crowd round and 
suffocate it; here an invalid, no heavier than a tuft of down, 
flies slowly away, but soon falls, one more on a heap of dried-up 


120 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


dead—and where, not long since, thousands of bees stood in 
circles, and back to back, watching the mysteries of hatching 
broods, there is only a sprinkling of exhausted workers, and in 
the cells the hapless dead, who, even in their last sleep seem 
to be guarding the desecrated and violated sanctuary. It is 
a realm of death and decay! The few that survive climb, 
try to fly, cling to the master’s hand, and are too weak even 
to sting ere they die. He seals up the door, marks it for 
destruction, and presently takes out the fragments of remaining 
comb. 

This was precisely the appearance of Moscow on that 14th 
of September. Those who had been left behind came and 
went as usual with mechanical regularity, making no change in 
the routine of life; while Napoleon, anxious and fuming, was 
pacing to and fro at the gate, waiting for the deputation to 
meet him—an empty ceremonial that he held indispensable. 
When at last they told him, with every conceivable circum- 
locution, that Moscow was empty, he scowled furiously at the 
man who had dared to utter the words, and continued his walk 
in silence. ‘The carriage!” he said; he got in with the assistance 
of the aide-de-camp in waiting, and drove into the town. 
Moscow deserted! What an incredible climax! Without 
attempting to go to the heart of the city, he alighted at 
an inn in the Dorogomilow suburb. The grand effect had 
missed fire. 


CHAPTER XLII 


Tue Russians poured through Moscow from two in the morning 
till two in the afternoon, closely followed by the wounded and 
the last remaining inhabitants. While they remained immov- 
ably locked on the Stone Bridge, the Moskva Bridge, and the 
Yaouza Bridge, quite unable to move forward, a mob of soldiers 
took advantage of the halt to steal back along Vassili-Blagennoi 
as far as the “Red Square," where they fancied they could 
help themselves to other people's property without any very 
great difficulty. The alleys and passages leading to the 
Gostinnoi-Dvor! were also thronged with men prompted by 
the same desire. 

No invitations to buy were to be heard; the itinerant 


1 The Bazaar of Moscow. 


121 


WAR AND PEACE 


merchants and their barrows had disappeared with the motley 
crowd of buyers and haggling women; the mob was exclusively 
composed of soldiers who had laid down their arms, and were 
going into the houses empty-handed, to come out loaded with 
spoil. The few owners who had remained on the spot were 
wandering about in dismay, opening and closing their shops, 
bringing out whatever they could first lay hands on, and giving 
it to their men to carry to some place of safety. On the square 
in front of the bazaar drums were beating a call to arms, but 
their rattle was ineffectual to restore discipline among the 
plundering soldiers, who, on the contrary, made off as fast 
as they could, while, through the seething mob, a few men in 
grey coats, with shaven heads, were moving to and fro. 

Two officers—one wearing a scarf and riding a wretched 
iron-grey nag, and the other in a cloak and on foot—were 
talking at the corner of a street; they were presently joined by 
a third, also on horseback. 

“The general says they are all to be driven out, come what 
may—half the men have deserted. Where are you off to?” 
he shouted to three infantry privates who were sneaking past 
to rejoin the ranks, holding up the skirts of their greatcoats. 

“How on earth are we to get them together again? ... 
We must make those we have march in double quick time to 
prevent their joining the others.” 

“But they cannot get forward; there is a deadlock on the 
bridge.” 

“Come—go forward and drive the mob in front of you,” 
said an old officer. 

The man with the scarf dismounted, and called the drummer, 
and they took their stand together under the arcade. A few 
soldiers began running with the crowd. A fat shopkeeper, 
with flushed, bloated cheeks, and a look of satisfied greed, went 
up to the officer, gesticulating eagerly. 

“Highness,” he said, with a free and easy air, “you must 
grant us more protection. As far as we are concerned it is a 
mere trifle; and if all that was expected was just enough to 
satisfy a gentleman like you, we should be only too glad— 
a couple of pieces of cloth are always at your service; for, 
of course, we know. But this is sheer pillage! If there were 
a patrol at any rate, or if we had had notice in time to shut 
Ty Raa 

Some other shopkeepers had joined the group. 

“What is the use of lamenting over such a trifle?” said one 


122 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


of them very gravely. “Who thinks of crying for his hair 
when his head is cut off? They may take what they please?” 
he added to the officer, with a gesture of despair. 

“Tt is all very well for you to talk so, Ivan Sidoritch,” said 
the other angrily. “Come, highness, come this way.” 

“I know what I am saying," said the old man. “Why, 
have not I three shops, and above a hundred thousand roubles 
in goods? But how can we hope to save our property when the 
troops are taken away? God’s will is stronger than ours!” 

“Only come,” repeated the other, bowing to the officer who 
looked undecided. “But, after all, what do I care!” he added 
suddenly, and he strode off. 

A great noise of fighting and swearing was audible inside a 
shop where the door stood half-open. He was on the point of 
going in to see what was happening, when one of the men with 
shaved heads, in a grey coat, was flung violently out. The man 
sprang up very nimbly, and stooping almost double, threaded 
his way between the officer and the shopkeepers, and was lost 
in the crowd, while the mob flew at the soldiers, who were 
forcing their way into the shop. 

At the same moment a tremendous outcry came up from the 
Moskva Bridge. 

“What is the matter? What is it?” cried the officer, rushing 
to the spot with his companion. 

Two cannon, removed from their permanent position, were 
placed at the end of the square, which was full of carts that 
had been overturned, and of infantry marching down on the 
people, who were running like mad creatures. Some soldiers 
were roaring with laughter as they stared at a huge waggon 
loaded with a mountain of furniture; on the top of it a woman 
was clinging with desperate shrieks to a child’s arm-chair with 
its legs in the air; four dogs fastened to the wagon were 
huddled together in alarm. From what the officer could learn, 
the shrieks of the crowd and the woman’s screams had their 
origin in a sudden panic. General Yermolow, hearing that the 
soldiers were pillaging the shops, and the inhabitants thronging 
the ways to the bridge, had had two guns brought down from 
their positions to make the people believe that he was going 
to clear the square by firing. Frenzied with terror, the mob 
had scrambled on to the carts and wagons, had upset them, 
pushing and yelling, and so had actually left the passage open 
for the troops who had marched on. 


125 


WAR AND PEACE 


CHAPTER XLIII 


In the heart of the city the streets were quite empty; private 
houses and shops alike were closed; near the taverns, here and 
there, drunken songs or shouting might be heard, but there 
was no sound of carriages or horses, and only the footfall of 
some rare passer-by echoed through the dismal silence. The 
Povarskaia was as still as the other streets; trusses of hay, 
ends of rope, and pieces of board littered the wide courtyard 
of the Rostows’ house—abandoned now, with all its splendid 
fittings; not a soul was to be seen, but the jingling of a piano 
came from the drawing-room: Michka, Vassil'tch's grandchild, 
who had been left behind, was amusing himself with strumming 
on the keys; while the gate-porter, with his hand on his hip, 
was standing in front of a long glass, and smiling graciously at 
his own reflection. 

“How clever I am, Uncle Ignatius!” cried the boy, patting 
with his hands on the keyboard. 

“Wonderful!” replied Ignatius, still gazing at the broad face 
that beamed at him from the mirror. 

“Oh! idle! Shamefully idle!” said the voice of Mavra Kouz- 
minichna, suddenly coming behind them. “I have caught you! 
Look at that great face, grinning at its own teeth, while nothing 
is put away, and Vassilitch can hardly stand, he is so tired.” 

The porter looked grave at once, pulled down his belt, and 
left the room with submissive eyes. 

*] am resting, little aunt!” 

“I daresay, indeed, you little imp! Be off and get the 
samovar ready for your grandfather.” 

Then the old woman dusted the furniture, shut the piano, sighed 
deeply, and took care to lock the drawing-room door behind her. 

She was standing in the courtyard, considering what she 
should do next—should she go and take tea with Vassilitch, or 
finish her work in the store-room—when hasty steps clattered 
down the deserted street and stopped at the gate; then some- 
one rattled violently at the latch of the door, trying to open it. 

"Who is there? What do you want?” cried the old house- 
keeper. 

“The count—Count Ilia Andréiévitch Rostow?” 

“Who are you?” 

“T am an officer, and I want to see him,” answered a pleasant 
voice. 


124 


The soldiers were pillaging the shops 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


Mavra Kouzminichna opened the wicket gate and saw in 
fact an officer, a lad of about eighteen, whose features were 
remarkably like those of the Rostow family. 

“But they are gone—they went yesterday evening,” she 
said, quite affectionately. 

“Oh, what ill-luck! I ought to have come yesterday,’ 
the young fellow regretfully. 

Meanwhile the old woman had been looking with sympathetic 
curiosity at the face—so like those that were familiar to her, 
at the youth’s ragged cloak and worn boots. 

“What did you want of the count?” 

* Oh! it is too late," said the lad somewhat crestfallen, as he 
| turned to go; but he paused in spite of himself as it seemed. 
“T am a sort of relation of his; he has always been very kind 
to me—and you see,” he added with a frank smile, as he pointed 
to his boots and his cloak—“I have not a farthing, and I 
wanted to ask the count . . .” 

Mavra Kouzminichna did not wait till he had finished. 

* Wait a moment,” she said shortly, and she trotted off to 
the side-court where her rooms were. The officer stood looking 
at his boots with a melancholy smile. 

* What a pity I have missed my uncle. And what a good 
old body! Where has she vanished to? I must ask her which 
is the shortest way to pick up my regiment, which by this 
time must have got to the Rogojskaia gate." 

He saw Mavra Kouzminichna coming back with a deter- 
mined though somewhat timid look; she had a checked hand- 
kerchief in her hand which, as she came near him, she untied, 
and took out a twenty-five rouble note, which she awkwardly 
offered him. 

* If his excellency had been at home, he would, of course . . . 
Butas Tt iso. Sr 

She paused in confusion, while the young fellow gladly grasped 
the money and thanked her effusively. 

*God be with you," said she, as she showed him out. The 
young officer darted off, along the abandoned streets, to rejoin 
his regiment.as soon as possible by the bridge over the Yaouza. 
Mavra Kouzminichna watched him go, and stood for a few 
minutes outside the gate which she had carefully closed. Her 
eyes were bright with tears; he was long since out of sight, but 
she was full of the motherly pity and feeling that had been 
stirred in her soul by the sight of this young fellow, who was a 
perfect stranger to her. 


' said 


125 


WAR AND PEACE 


CHAPTER XLIV 


Tue ground floor of an unfinished house in the Varvarka was 
occupied by a tavern ringing at this moment with drunken 
shouts and songs. Ten or more workmen were seated round 
the tables in a low dirty room—all tipsy, with coats unbuttoned 
and bloodshot eyes—and singing at the top of their voices; but 
it was easy to see that it was not out of jollity. Their faces 
streamed with perspiration; it was mere rollicking bravado and 
defiance. One of them, a fair, tall, young fellow, in a blue . 
smock, might have been thought good-looking if his thin lips 
which twitched incessantly, and his gloomy, glassy eyes had 
not given his face a strange and sinister expression. He seemed 
to lead the chorus, beating time with great gravity, and waving 
his arm right and left above their heads; his sleeves were rolled 
back, and the white skin showed almost to the shoulder. 

Suddenly, in the midst of the song a sound as of fighting 
fists was heard, and he abruptly stopped, saying in a tone of 
command: 

“That will do, boys; they are fighting outside”; and rolling 
up his sleeve, which kept tumbling down over his wrist, he 
went out followed by his companions. 

They, like himself, were workmen, whom the tavern-keeper 
was treating in payment for some leather of various kinds 
which they had brought from the factory where they worked. 
Some blacksmiths, fancying from the noise within that some- 
thing extraordinary must be going on, had tried to get in; but 
the tavern-keeper and a shoeing-smith had come to blows in 
the doorway; the smith was thrown, and went reeling into the 
middle of the street, where he fell face downwards. One of his 
comrades immediately flew at the tavern-keeper, got him down 
and knelt on his chest with all his weight; but at that instant 
the young man of the rolled-up sleeve appeared on the scene, 
and dealing the smith a tremendous blow, shouted vehemently: 
* Come on lads, they are killing our man!" 

The shoeing-smith lifted up a blood-stained face, and cried 
out in a doleful voice: 

“Help this way, help! A man is killed—help!” 

"Lord have mercy! they have killed a man!" bleated a 
woman, putting her head out of the gate next door. 

A crowd had gathered round the fallen man. 

“You are not content with robbing the poor wretches, and 


126 


SS eee WwEC TENUES w-o€€cM ee 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


fleecing them of their last rag, but you must kill a man, 
rascal!” 

The fair man standing in the doorway turned his dull eyes 
from the tavern-keeper to the shoeing-smith, as if doubtful 
which he should quarrel with. 

“Villain!” he suddenly yelled, flying at the tavern-keeper. 
“Tie his hands, boys.” 

“What! Tie my hands?” cried the man; he shook off his 
enemies with a violent effort, and snatching off his cap, flung 
it on the ground. It might have been supposed that this 
action bore some mysterious and ominous meaning, for the 
men instantly stood quiet. “I am for law and order, lads; 
and I know what order means better than any of you... 
I have only to go and fetch the police.... What! you think 
I shall not go? You will see. Any row in the streets is par- 
ticularly forbidden to-day, do you understand?" And he 
picked up his cap. “Well, come on," he added, and he walked 
off, followed by the fair man, the shoeing-smith, the workmen, 
and all the crowd, shouting and yelling with excitement. “Come 
on, come on!” 

At the corner of the street a score of journeymen-shoemakers 
were standing in front of a house with closed shutters, and a 
bootmaker's sign-board swinging in the wind; their clothes 
were shabby, and their dejected faces bore the marks of ex- 
haustion from hunger. 

* Now, ought not he to have paid us our wages?" said one, 
with a scowl. “Not a bit of it; he has drained our blood, and 
thinks the score is settled; he has fooled us all the week, and 
now he has bolted!" Then, seeing the other party approaching, 
he broke off, and he and his comrades joined the new-comers 
out of mere restless curiosity. 

“Where are we going? Oh! we know; we are going to find 
the police." 

* [s it a fact, then, that we are getting the upper hand?" 

“Why, what did you suppose? Listen to what they are 
saying." 

While everyone was asking questions, or answering at random, 
the tavern-keeper took advantage of the hubbub to make him- 
self scarce, and stole home again. The young workman, not 
noticing the disappearance of his foe, continued his harangue, 
waving his bare arms, and so attracting the attention of the 
little mob, who eagerly hoped to hear some explanation that 
might encourage them. 


1527) 


WAR AND PEACE 


“He says that he knows what law is, that he knows what 
order means! But have we not the authorities to tell us that? 
Don’t you say that I am right, boys? How can the world get 
on without the authorities? Why, everyone will be robbed— 
and then P 

“Stuff and nonsense!" said a man in the crowd. “Do you 
believe they would all leave Moscow like that? Someone has 
been laughing at you, and you have taken it for gospel! Why, 
you can see what a lot of soldiers there are in the streets; do 
you think they will let ‘him’ just march in? The authorities 
are there to prevent it. Listen to what he says!" he added, 
pointing to the fair man. 

Near the wall of the Kitai-Gorod a group had gathered 
round a man who was reading a paper aloud. 

“He is reading the ukase—listen, the ukase!” said one and 
another, and the whole party moved in that direction. The 
man with the paper, seeing himself the centre of a crowd, 
seemed somewhat embarrassed; but, at the workmen's request, 
he began again, in a rather tremulous voice: it was Rostop- 
chine's last proclamation, dated August 31 (September 12th):— 

“I am going to-morrow to see his highness— his high- 
ness," the fair man repeated in a solemn tone, but with a smile 
—“ to consult with him that we may act in concert, and help 
the troops to destroy these ruffians, and send them to the devil. 
I shall be back to dinner, and set to work once more, and then 
we will act decisively, and give ‘him’ a thorough licking." 

The last words were received in total silence. The young 
workman stood with his head bent, looking very gloomy; it 
was evident that no one had quite understood but that the 
phrase, “I shall be back to dinner," had produced an unpleasant 
impression. The feeling of the populace was at such a high pitch 
of tension, that this commonplace platitude rang false in their 
ear. Anyone might say such a thing as that; in a ukase from 
a high authority it was quite out of place. No one broke the 
gloomy silence—not even the fair lad, though his lips quivered 
spasmodically. 

“Let us go and ask him. Hallo! There he is! He will 
tell us himself ” cried a number of voices; their attention 
was attracted to an official personage, whose carriage, with an 
escort of dragoons, had just appeared in the square. It was 
the chief commissioner of police, who had just been to set fire 
to the shipping in the river by Rostopchine’s orders. He had 
brought back a considerable sum of money, which, at the 


128 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


moment, was snugly deposited in his pockets. Seeing a crowd 
moving towards him, he desired the coachman to pull up. 

“What is the matter?" he asked of the foremost, as they 
timidly approached. ^ Well, what is it?" he repeated, getting 
no reply. 

“Your excellency, it is—it is nothing," said a man, in a 
cloak. “They are ali ready to obey your excellency, and to do 
their duty, and to risk their lives. It is not a riot, excellency, 
but as the count has sent word . . ." 

*'The count has not gone. He is here, and you shall not 
be forgotten! Drive on," he added to the coachman. 

The crowd had stood quiet, pressing closely round those who 
were supposed to have heard what the representative of power 
had said; but still, it allowed him to drive off. The com- 
missioner looked back in alarm, and said a few words to the 
driver, who flogged his horses to their utmost speed. 

* We are being deceived, boys! Let us go to the count 
himself, and don't let that one go! He shall be called to 
account for this! Stop him, stop him!” 

And they all rushed, helter skelter, in pursuit of the chief 
commissioner of police. 


CHAPTER XLV 


Durinc the evening of the 13th, Rostopchine had had an 
interview with Koutouzow, and had come away deeply offended. 
As he was not a member of the council of war, his proposal 
to assist in defending the city was not even noticed; he was 
also extremely astonished at the faith in the tranquillity of 
Moscow which prevailed in the camp, some high personages 
seeming indeed to regard its loyalty as a secondary and un- 
important factor. 

On his return, after eating his supper, he lay down, without 
undressing, to rest on a sofa; between midnight and one in the 
morning a servant woke him with a letter from Koutouzow, 
which had come by an express messenger. This announced that 
the army was to retire behind Moscow, by the Riazan road, 
and begged him to be good enough to send the police force to 
facilitate the march of the regiments through the town. This 
was not news to the count ; he had foreseen this 1ssue even before 


129 


WAR AND PEACE 


his meeting with Koutouzow, nay, the very day after Borodino. 
In fact all the generals had agreed that a second pitched battle 
was out of the question, and consequently all the treasure and 
crown valuables had been conveyed out of the city. Neverthe- 
less this command, in the form of a mere note from Koutouzow, 
and brought at night to rouse him out of his first sleep, annoyed 
him to the last degree. 

After the event, when he amused his leisure by writing an 
explanation of all he had done at this crisis, Count Rostopchine 
stated in several passages in his memoirs that his object through- 
out had been to keep Moscow quiet, and induce the inhabitants 
to quit it. If this was, in fact, what he aimed at, his conduct 
was above reproach. Why was not the wealth of the capital 
saved—arms, stores, powder, and corn? Why were thousands 
of inhabitants cheated and ruined by being told that Moscow 
would not be evacuated? “To preserve tranquillity,” says 
Count Rostopchine. Why were masses of worthless documents 
removed, and Leppich’s balloon, and fifty other things? “In 
order that nothing should be sacrificed,” says the count again. 
If these views are admissible, everything he did may be 
justified. 

All the horrors of the Reign of Terror in France were, in 
the same way, intended to secure public tranquillity. What 
could have given Count Rostopchine any ground for fearing a 
revolution at Moscow when the inhabitants had left, and the 
army had retired? Neither there, nor on any other spot of 
Russian ground, did anything take place which had the faintest 
resemblance to a revolt. 

On the 13th and r4th of September there were still above 
ten thousand men left in Moscow, and excepting at one moment 
when the crowd collected in some excitement, by the governor’s 
orders in the courtyard of his residence, there was no sign of a 
riot. Nor would there have been any reason to fear one, even 
if it had been announced after Borodino that the city must be 
abandoned instead of asserting the very contrary, distributing 
arms, and, in short, taking every step which could conduce to 
keeping up the effervescence of the mob. 

Rostopchine was a man of sanguine and irritable tempera- 
ment; he had always lived and moved in the higher circles of 
official administration; consequently, in spite of his very 
genuine patriotism, he knew nothing of the people, though he 
flattered himself he could manage them. Ever since the enemy 
had crossed the frontier he had assumed that he could play the 


130 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


part of supreme and active ruler of the national movement in 
the heart of Russia. He fancied that he not only governed the 
actions of the inhabitants, but influenced their impulses by 
means of his “posters’”—proclamations written in a style of 
vulgar familiarity which the populace hold cheap even among 
themselves, and which they feel to be derogatory from the pen 
of a superior. But the part was to his fancy; he had thrown 
himself into it, and the necessity for laying it down before he 
could find an opportunity for some heroic exploit took him by 
surprise. The ground was cut from under his feet, and he did 
not know what line of conduct to pursue. 

Though he had so long foreseen the catastrophe, he resisted 
the conviction that Moscow must be sacrificed to the very last 
moment, and would do nothing with a view to such a result. 
It was against his wish that the inhabitants were quitting the 
town, and it was extremely difficult to persuade him to authorise 
the steps necessary to secure the safety of the archives of the 
law courts. All his energies and all his actions were devoted to 
keeping alive in the citizens that patriotic hatred of the foe and 
that self-confidence with which he himself was so thoroughly 
imbued. As to any measure of the extent to which this energy 
was understood and shared by the populace no estimate has ever 
been possible. But when, in the course of their development, 
events assumed their true historical proportions—when words 
were too feeble to express the hatred of the nation for the 
invader, though it was not possible to give it vent in the fury 
of battle—when self-reliance was no longer sufficient to defend 
Moscow—when the people rushed away like a torrent, carrying 
their property with them, displaying by this act of negative 
determination the strength of their national feeling—then 
Rostopchine's attitude suddenly became an absurdity; he felt 
deserted, helpless, and ridiculous, and with the ground cut 
away from under his feet. Having received on waking the 
cold and commanding epistle of Koutouzow he felt all the more 
irritated because he knew himself to be guilty. Everything 
that Moscow contained had been entrusted to him—everything 
belonging to the State, and which it was his business to see 
taken into safety. And now to take it out of town was no 
longer possible. “And who is answerable?” he asked himself. 
“Certainly not I. All was in readiness, I held Moscow in my 
two hands and this is what they have chosen to do Traitors! 
Scoundrels!" he cried out in his rage, not identifying the 
traitors and scoundrels against whom he was railing, but stung 


131 


WAR AND PEACE 


with an impulse of hatred towards those who, in his opinion, 
had placed him in this ridiculous position. 

He spent the night in giving orders which everyone came 
to ask for; his friends and household had never seen him so 
morose and unmanageable. 

“Excellency, here is a message from the Consistory—from 
the University—from the Senate House—from the Foundling 
Hospital. . . ." “The firemen—the governor of the prison 
—the director of the lunatic asylum want to know what is to 
be done!" And so it went on all night. 

The count's answers were short and stern, and simply in- 
tended to convey that he declined to take upon himself any 
responsibility for the instructions he gave, but threw it all on 
those who had nullified his efforts. 

“Tell the idiot to take proper care of his archives—and the 
other one not to worry me with silly questions about his fire- 
men . . . If they have horses let them go to Vladimir. Does 
he want to leave them for the French?" 

“Excellency, the inspector of lunatic asylums is here, what 
is he to do?” 

“To go of course; to go at once, and turn the madmen loose 
in the town. Since the army is commanded by madmen it is 
only fair that those who are shut up should be set free.” 

When he was asked what was to be done with the prisoners, 
the count flew into a rage. “Do you expect me to give you two 
battalions to escort them out of the city? There are no troops, 
you know. Well then, set them at liberty." 

“But, excellency, there are the political prisoners—Metchkow 
and Verestchaguine." 

"Verestchaguine? Is he not hanged yet. Bring him here." 


CHAPTER XLVI 


By about nine in the morning, when the troops began marching 
through the town, the count had ceased to be importuned with 
vexatious questions; those who were leaving and those who 
were staying no longer needed his advice. He had ordered 
his carriage to go to Sokolniki, and while waiting for it sat down 
with his arms crossed and a scowling brow. 

In times of peace, when the humblest administrator com- 
placently believes the lives of those to whom he administrates 


152 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


depend solely on his care, he finds the rich reward of his 
pains in the consciousness of his own indispensable utility. So 
long as the calm lasts, the pilot who leads the way in his frail 
boat, showing the bulky man-of-war the line along which it 
must steer, firmly believes—as is but natural—that his personal 
efforts are moving the huge hulk; but if a storm should rise 
and the surges drive the ship out of her course, she rides the 
waves in majestic independence, and the pilot, who before was 
apparently omnipotent, is now feeble and useless. This was 
what Rostopchine felt, and he was deeply agerieved. 

The chief commissioner of police—the official who had been 
stopped by the crowd—came into the count’s room at the same 
time as the aide-de-camp, who announced that the governor's 
carriage was ready. Both men were pale, and the commissioner, 
after reporting to the governor as to the results of his errand, 
went on to say that the courtyard was full of a great crowd 
who were asking to see him. The count, without saying a 
word, went into the drawing-room and laid his hand on the 
latch of the glass door that led out on to the balcony; but, 
changing his mind, he went to another window, from which he 
could watch what was going on outside. The tall, fair man 
was still haranguing and gesticulating; the shoeing-smith, 
covered with blood, stood at his elbow in sullen anger, and the 
sound of voices came through the closed panes. 

“The carriage is ready?" asked Rostopchine. 

“Quite ready, your excellency," said the aide-de-camp. 

“And what do those fellows want?” asked Rostopchine, 
going towards the balcony. 

“They have assembled, they say, to march against the 
French by your orders. They talk of treason too; they are a 
riotous crew, and I only just escaped from them. Allow me to 
suggest to your excellency. . . 2 

“Have the goodness to withdraw; I know what I have to 
do"— and he still stood looking out. “This is what they 
have brought the country to, and this is what they have 
brought me to!" he went on, his passion against those whom 
he held guilty rising to a pitch of savage fury beyond his 
control. ‘There they are—the mob, the very dregs of the 
people, that they have brought to the top by their folly! 
They want a victim perhaps," thought he, as his eyes fell on 
the young ringleader, and he wondered to himself on whom he 
could pour out the vials of his rage. 

“Ts the carriage quite ready?" he asked once more. 


133 


WAR AND PEACE 


“Yes, excellency. What orders have you to give with regard 
to Verestchaguine; he is below.” 

“Ah!” cried Rostopchine, struck by a new idea; he opened 
the glass door and stepped out on to the balcony. The crowd 
uncovered their heads and all turned to look at him. 

“Good day, my children,” he said loudly and hurriedly. 
“Thank you for coming. I will be among you in a moment; 
but first I have to settle with the wretch who has lost us 
Moscow. Wait.” And he went back into the room as suddenly 
as he had come out. 

A murmur of satisfaction ran through the crowd. 

“You will see—he will make everything right—and you 
would have it that the French—" and so on—reproaching each - 
other for want of confidence. 

Two minutes later an officer made his appearance at the front 
door and said a few words to the dragoons who formed in a 
line; the crowd, eagerly curious, pressed forward towards the 
portico, where Rostopchine now came out. 

“Where is he?” he said wrathfully. 

Just then a young man appeared upon the scene, coming 
round the corner of the house; his neck was thin, his head 
half-shaved, and he wore a blue caftan, once an elegant garment, 
and a convict’s dirty, shabby trousers; he walked slowly between 
two dragoons painfully dragging his shrunken legs and heavy 
chains. 

“Put him there,” said Rostopchine, pointing to the bottom 
step; but he did not look at the prisoner. The young man 
stepped up with difficulty, and the clank of his fetters was heard ; 
he sighed, and dropping his hands, which were not at all like 
those of a working man, he stood with them folded in a sub- 
missive attitude. During this little scene not a sound was 
heard but a stifling cry here and there in the background where 
the people were crushing each other in their anxiety to see. 
The count, frowning, waited till the prisoner was in his place. 

“Children!” he began in a sharp, ringing voice. “This is 
Verestchaguine, the man who has lost Moscow!” 

The prisoner, whose pallid features expressed utter prostra- 
tion of mind and body, held his head down ; but as the count 
spoke, he slowly raised it and looked at him from under his 
brows; he seemed anxious to speak, or perhaps to catch his 
eye. All down his slender throat a blue vein swelled like whip- 
cord, and his face flushed. Everyone turned to gaze at him, 
and he smiled sadly, as though he felt encouraged by a belief 


134 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


in their sympathy; then his head fell again and he tried to 
stand steady on the step. 

“He has betrayed his sovereign and his country; he sold 
himself to Bonaparte; he is the only man of us all who has 
disgraced the name of Russian. It is through him that Moscow 
is perishing!” said Rostopchine in a steady hard voice. Sud- 
denly, with a glance at his victim, he added in a louder voice, 
“T give him over to you to judge. Take him!” 

The crowd, still speechless, packed closer and closer; the 
press was intolerable, and it became agony to breathe in the 
malodorous atmosphere while awaiting something awful and 
unknown. The men in the front ranks, who had seen and 
understood, stood open-mouthed, their eyes staring with fright 
—a barrier to the surging of the throng behind them 

«Kil him! Let the traitor perish!” cried Rostopchine. 
* Put him to the sword—I order it!” 

An universal cry rose up in response to the furious tone in 
which the words were spoken, though they were scarcely 
articulate; there was a general forward movement, but it 
was instantly checked. 

“Count,” said Verestchaguine, timidly but solemnly, during 
this brief lull, “count, the same God judges us both. . .!" 
and he stopped. 

«Kill him! I command you!” repeated Rostopchine, white 
with rage. 

“Draw swords!” cried the officer in command. 

At these words the crowd heaved like a billow, pushing 
the front ranks against the portico steps. Thus the fair-haired 
orator was brought quite close to Verestchaguine; his face 
looked stony—he still held his arm in the air. 

“Get it done!” said the officer in a low tone to his men, and 
one of the dragoons hit Verestchaguine violently with the flat 
of his sword. 

The poor wretch cried out with sheer terror; he hardly felt 
the blow. A thrill of horror and pity went through the crowd. 

“Oh Lord! Oh Lord!” pleaded a voice; but Verestchaguine 
shrieked, and that shriek sealed his fate. The human feeling 
which till now had held the frenzied mass in suspense suddenly 
gave way, and the crime, already half done, could no longer 
be averted. A dull roar of rage and revenge drowned the last 
murmurs of pity; like the fatal ninth wave which destroys a 
sinking ship, a human wave rolled irresistibly onward; the 
hindmost of the crowd bore down among the front rows, and 


135 


WAR AND PEACE 


all were mingled in indescribable disorder. The dragoon who 
had already hit Verestchaguine raised his hand for a second 
stroke. The miserable wretch, covering his face with his hands, 
flung himself among the people. The young ringleader, against 
whom he fell, gripped him by the throat, and with a yell like 
a wild beast, fell with the prisoner in the middle of the mob, 
which rushed upon them both. Some pulled or hit Verestcha- 
guine, others fell upon the lad, and their cries only incited the 
rage of their enemies. It was long before the dragoons were 
able to rescue the young workman, who was half dead; and, 
in spite of the violence they put into their bloody deed, the 
murderers could not beat the life out of their hapless and hardly 
breathing victim, for the dense mass crushed and squeezed them 
as in a vice, so that they had not room to do their hideous work. 

“Finish him off with an axe! Is he well pummelled? 
A traitor! a Judas! Is he not dead yet? He has been paid 
his score!” 

Not till the poor wretch had ceased to struggle, and his chest 
scarcely heaved with the death rattle, did the mob make way 
round his bleeding body: then all came in turn to stare, and 
turned away shuddering and shocked. 

“Good God! What a wild beast a mob is! How could he 
possibly have escaped! And he is quite a young fellow, too! 
Some shopkeeper’s son, no doubt! Oh! the mob! And now 
they say he was not the right man after all; they gave another 
a good beating! How can they be so little afraid of such a 
sin—?” They could all say this now, as they looked at the 
mangled body and the face all disfigured with dust and blood. 
A zealous soldier in the police service, thinking that the body 
ought not to be left to cumber the courtyard of the governor’s 
house, ordered that it should be thrown into the street, and the 
dragoons dragged it out without ceremony, the head knocking 
against the stones, while the people shrank back in dismay as 
the corpse went by. 

At the first moment, when Verestchaguine fell and the crowd 
flew at him, Rostopchine had turned as pale as death, and 
instead of making for the side door where the carriage was 
waiting for him, he hurriedly ran into the rooms on the ground 
floor, he himself knew not why. His teeth were chattering as 
if with ague. 

“Excellency, not that way!  Here— !" cried a scared 
servant. 

Rostopchine mechanically followed, found his carriage, 


136 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


jumped in, and told the coachman to drive to his country 
residence. He could hear the yells of the mob in the distance; 
and as he went farther away from it, the recollection of the 
excitement and alarm he had allowed himself to display before 
his inferiors annoyed him excessively. “The mob is terrible, 
hideous!” said he to himself in French. “It is like a troop of 
wolves that can only be appeased with flesh!” 

“Count, the same God judges us both!” he remembered 
Verestchaguine’s words; a cold chill ran down his spine. But 
it was only for an instant, and he smiled at his own weakness. 
“Come, come,” thought he, “I had a duty to fulfil. The people 
had to be pacified! . . . public good is merciless on individuals!” 
and he reflected on his duty to his family, to the capital entrusted 
to his keeping, and to himself—not as a private resident, but as 
his sovereign’s representative. “Had I been no more than a 
private gentleman my line of conduct must have been quite 
different, but under existing circumstances I was bound, at 
any cost, to protect the life and dignity of the governor-general! B 

Comfortably rocked in his chariot, his body recovered by 
degrees, and as is always the way, with the calming of the 
body, came calm to the mind. His mind suggested the most 
flattering arguments to soothe his spirit. They were not new 
ones; ever since the world was created and men began to kill 
each other, no man that has ever committed a crime of this 
character has failed to hush his remorse by reflecting that he 
was forced to it by his regard for the good of the public. Only 
those who do not allow their passions to get the upper hand 
refuse to admit that the good of the public can require such 
deeds. Rostopchine did not for a moment blame himself for 
Verestchaguine's death; on the contrary, he formed a hundred 
reasons for being satisfied with his own tact in punishing a 
malefactor, and at the same time pacifying the mob. 

“Verestchaguine was tried and condemned to death,” said 
he to himself—but, in fact he had only been condemned to 
penal servitude. “Te was a traitor, and I could not let him go 
unpunished. Thus I killed two birds with one stone.” 

As soon as he reached his destination he proceeded to various 
other occupations, and so put to rout any further doubts he 
might have had. 

Half an hour later he was driving across the open ground of 
Sokolniki, having quite forgotten all previous incidents; think- 
ing only of the future, he made his way to speak with Koutou- 
zow who, as he was told, was to be found at the bridge over 


137 


WAR AND PEACE 


the Yaouza. As he rode along he prepared a speech of extreme 
severity, denouncing the commander-in-chief’s disloyal conduct, 
by which he hoped to make that old “‘court-fox” feel that he 
alone was answerable for the woes of Russia and the loss of 
Moscow. The open plain was quite deserted, excepting that at 
the opposite side, in front of a workhouse and the lunatic asylum, 
a number of persons dressed all in white were moving about, 
some of them shouting and gesticulating. When the count’s 
chariot came in view one of these men ran forward to meet it. 
The coachman, the dragoons, and Rostopchine himself looked 
with interest mingled with alarm at this party of mad creatures 
who had just been liberated, and particularly at the man who 
was coming towards them with an unsteady gait, his long 
white dressing-gown flying behind his lank legs. He kept his 
eyes fixed on the count, and shouted to him unintelligible 
words, while he signed to him to stop. His haggard and 
gloomy face was covered with tufts of hair; his eyeballs were 
yellow, with large, jet-black pupils, and they rolled with a 
scared and restless glare. 

“Stop! Stop!” he shouted, panting for breath: and then 
he went on with his harangue and his extravagant gesticulations. 
At last he reached the carriage and ran on by the side of it as 
it went. 

“I have been killed three times, and three times have I risen 
from the dead! . . . They stoned me, they crucified me. But 
I shall rise again—I shall rise again! Three times must the 
Kingdom of God be overthrown, and three times shall I re- 
establish it!” and his voice rose almost to a scream. 

Count Rostopchine turned pale, as he had done when the 
mob had flung itself on Verestchaguine. 

“Go on—faster, faster!” he cried to the coachman, quaking 
with fear. 

The horses dashed onward; but still the madman’s cries 
rang in his ears, as he left him farther and farther behind; 
and before him rose the blood-stained form of Verestchaguine in 
his fur-trimmed caftan. Time, he knew, could never dim the 
clearness of that vision; the fearful traces of that scene, he 
felt, would sink deeper and deeper into his soul, and haunt him 
till his dying day. He could hear himself say it: “Kill him— 
on your heads be it if you do not.” 

"Why should I have said that? he involuntarily wondered. 
"I might have held my tongue and nothing would have 
happened." He could see the dragoon's face with its sudden 


138 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


change from terror to ferocity, and the sad look of timid reproach 
in his victim's eyes: “But no—I could not do otherwise—the 
mob—-the traitor—the safety of the public. . . ." 


The bridge over the Vaouza was still crowded with troops; 
the heat was intense. Koutouzow, tired and anxious, was 
sitting on a bench close by and mechanically tracing figures in 
the sand, when a general in a cocked hat with an enormous 
plume of feathers got out of a carriage at a short distance off 
and addressed him in French with a mixed air of irritation and 
hesitancy. It was Count Rostopchine, and he explained to 
Koutouzow that he had come in search of him, since, as Moscow 
had ceased to exist, there was nothing left but the army. 

“Matters would have turned out differently,” he said, “‘if 
your highness had told me that Moscow would be deserted 
without a struggle!” 

Koutouzow looked at him, not paying any particular heed to 
his words, but simply trying to read the expression of his face, 
and Rostopchine, abashed, said no more. Koutouzow quietly 
nodded his head, and without taking his eyes off him said: 
“No, I will not abandon Moscow without a struggle!” 

Was he thinking of something else, or did he speak in full 
consciousness that the words were meaningless? Rostopchine 
withdrew, and strange to say this proud man, Governor-General 
of Moscow, found nothing better to do than to proceed to the 
bridge and stand there cracking a whip to drive on the carts 
that crowded the road. 


CHAPTER XLVII 


Ar four o'clock in the afternoon Murat’s army entered Moscow, 
preceded by a detachment of Wurtemberg Hussars. The King 
of Naples himself, with a large suite, came on horseback behind. 
Having reached the Arbat, Murat waited for information from 
the van as to the state of the fortress known as the Kremlin. 
A few idlers gathered round him, staring in amazement at this 
foreign commander with his long hair, his coat blazing with 
. gold, and his many-coloured plume of feathers. 

“I say, is that their king?” said one. 

An interpreter rode up to the crowd. 

“Take your cap off!” whispered somebody in the crowd. 


139 


WAR AND PEACE 


The interpreter came forward, and speaking to an old gate- 
keeper, asked him whether it were far to the Kremlin. Puzzled 
by the Polish accent, which was strange to Lim, the man did 
not understand the question, and slunk behind his companions. 
Murat rode up to the interpreter and told him to ask where 
the Russian troops were. One of the Russians understood the 
question and several voices answered together. At this moment 
an officer came up from the front to tell Murat that the gates 
of the citadel were shut, and that no doubt those within were 
preparing to defend it. 

“Very good,” he said, and he ordered one of his aides-de-camp 
to bring up three guns. The artillery set out at a trot, and 
Murat, passing the column which was to follow, crossed the 
Arbat. When they reached the end of the street the column 
stopped. Some French officers directed the placing of the guns 
and examined the Kremlin through a field-glass. Suddenly 
the bells began to ring for vespers; believing it to be an alarm 
they took fright, and some infantrymen ran forward to the 
Koutafiew gates, which were barricaded with beams and planks. 
As they approached two shots were fired. The general in 
command of the artillery shouted a few words, and all, officers 
and soldiers alike, turned back. Three more shots were fired 
and a soldier was wounded in the foot. Seeing this, a deter- 
mination to fight it out and face death became visible on every 
face, taking the place of the calm and easy expression which 
till this moment they had worn. All, from the field-marshal 
to the humblest private, understood that this was not merely 
a street in Moscow, but a field of battle—where a bloody struggle 
was perhaps imminent. The guns were pointed, the gunners 
lighted their slow matches, the officer shouted: “Fire! Two 
sharp whistles rent the air at once, the grape-shot rattled and 
sank with a sharp noise into the beams, the stonework, and 
the barricade, while two puffs of smoke hovered over the pieces. 
The echo of their discharge had hardly died away when a 
strange noise was heard in the air: an enormous number of 
rooks flew up from the walls and soared in a circle, croaking 
and beating their wings heavily as they rose. At the same 
moment a solitary shout was heard behind the barricade, and 
in the midst of the smoke, as it cleared away, the figure of a 
man stood revealed, bareheaded, wearing a caftan, and aiming 
at the French with a musket. 

“Fire!” repeated the artillery officer, and the crack of the 
musket rang out at the same moment as the roar of the cannon. 


140 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


A cloud of smoke hid the gate; there was not another sound; 
the foot soldiers again went forward. Three wounded men and 
four dead lay in front of the entrance, while two men fled 
along under the wall. 

“Clear away!” said the officer, pointing to the beams and 
the bodies. 

The French finished off the wounded and threw the bodies 
over the railings. Who were these men? No one ever knew. 
Monsieur Thiers alone has even mentioned them. “These 
wretches had taken possession of the sacred stronghold, seized 
some muskets out of the arsenal and fired on the French. 
Some were cut down and the Kremlin was purged of their 
presence." ! Murat was now told that the way was open. The 
French entered the gates and bivouacked on the square in front 
of the Senate House, while the soldiers invaded the premises 
and threw the chairs out of windows to make their fires. The 
different detachments followed in files, marching through 
the Kremlin to find empty and deserted houses where they 
established themselves, as it were in camp. 

Their uniforms were worn out, their faces haggard and 
hungry, they were reduced to a half of their original strength, 
but they nevertheless entered Moscow in good order. But as 
soon as they dispersed through the abandoned city the army, 
quá army, ceased to exist, and the soldier was lost in the 
marauder. These marauders, when they left Moscow five weeks 
later, carried off loads of objects which they regarded as neces- 
sary or valuable. Their aim was no longer conquest but the 
preservation of what they had stolen. Like a monkey who, 
after having plunged his hand into a narrow-necked jar and 
grasped a quantity of nuts will not open his fist for fear of losing 
his plunder and so risks his life, the French increased the perils 
of their retreat by dragging after them an enormous mass of 
booty; which, like the monkey, they would not relinquish. 

Within ten minutes of their dispersal, soldiers and officers 
were indistinguishable. Men might be seen inside the houses, 
passing across the windows, to and fro, in gaiters and uniforms, 
examining the rooms with a look of satisfaction, and rummaging 
the cellars and ice-houses for provisions. They tore down the 
gates of the stables and coach-houses, and turning up their 
sleeves to the elbows, lighted the stoves and cooked their 
dinners, amusing some of the inhabitants that had lingered 
behind, frightening others, trying to win over the women and 

1* The wretches,” as Monsieur Thiers calls them, were the convicts. 


141 


WAR AND PEACE 


children. This sort of men swarmed everywhere—in the shops 
and in the streets, but of soldiers in the true sense there were none. 

It was in vain that repeated orders were sent to the different 
heads of divisions desiring them to keep the men from running 
about the town, from using any violence towards the inhabitants, 
and from pillage; quite in vain was the rule that the roll was 
to be called daily. In spite of every precaution these men, 
who only yesterday were an army, were scattered throughout 
the deserted city, seeking the abundant stores of food and means 
of enjoyment which it still contained. Like a herd of cattle 
that wanders off and breaks up as soon as rich pasturage is 
reached after the desert, so did this army wander off in the 
rich town; and they were soon lost, as water is lost which 
trickles away through sand. The cavalry quartered in a rich 
merchant’s house, which had been abandoned with all con- 
tents, found adjoining stables of far greater extent than they 
really needed; but they nevertheless could not be kept from 
overflowing into the next house which they fancied was more 
commodious. Some, indeed, took possession of several houses 
at once, and made haste to write on the doors with a scrap of 
chalk the names of the occupants; so that finally the men of 
different corps fell to quarrelling and abusing each other. Even 
before they settled into their quarters they ran about to inspect 
the town, and rushed off to the places where, from hearsay, 
they expected to find articles of value. Their chiefs, after 
vainly trying to check them, allowed themselves to succumb 
to the temptation to commit similar depredations. Even the 
generals crowded to the coachmakers’ warehouses to choose, 
one a chariot and another a travelling-carriage. The few 
inhabitants who had not been able to get away offered free 
quarters to the superior officers, in the hope of thus escaping 
pillage. Wealth was abundant; there seemed no end to the 
plunder, and the French fancied that they would find even 
greater treasure in the parts of the town that they had not yet 
explored. And as when water is poured on dry soil, the water 
and the dry soil disappear, so when a hungry army enters a 
wealthy town, disappear both the army and wealthy town— 
the result is mud, fire a. d pillage. 


The French ascribe the burning of Moscow to Rostopchine’s 
savage patriotism; the Russians attribute it to the barbarity 
of the French; but, in point of fact, neither Rostopchine nor 
the invaders can be held responsible for it. The condition of 


142 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


the town itself was the real cause. Moscow was burnt, as any 
town might have been which was built of wood—quite apart 
from the state of the fire-engines and whether there were any 
left or no. Moscow was burnt because it was deserted by its 
inhabitants, and as inevitably as a pile of saw-dust on which 
sparks have been falling for several days. A town built of 
wood in which while it was in the possession of its inhabitant- 
owners and with a police, fires break out every day, cannot 
but catch fire when the inhabitants are not there, and an army 
smoking, making bonfires in its squares of the furniture out of 
the houses and cooking two meals a day, is in possession. When 
an army, even in time of peace, is encamped in a village, the 
number of fires increases enormously. What must then be the 
fate of a town built of wood and in the possession of a hostile 
army? The savage patriotism of Rostopchine and the barbarity 
of the French can neither of them be blamed. Moscow was 
burnt because of the pipes, the kitchens, the bonfires; because 
of the carelessness of enemy soldiers, the non-owning inhabitants 
of the houses. If there was any incendiarism (which is doubt- 
ful) it cannot be considered the reason, for without it the same 
result was bound to occur. If it is in any sense true that 
Moscow was burnt by the inhabitants, it is not less certain that 
it was not by those who had remained there, but by the fact 
that so many had left. Moscow was not treated by the French 
with such respect as Berlin and Vienna, because its inhabitants 
did not welcome the invaders with bread and salt and the keys 
of the gates, but preferred to leave it to its hapless fate. 


CHAPTER XLVIII 


Ir was not till the afternoon of the 2nd—r4th September— 
that the tide of invasion reached the quarter where Peter was 
living. He had spent two days in total solitude and in a very 
strange manner, and he was in a state little short of insanity. 
One thought alone so entirely possessed him that he no longer 
knew how and when it had first come to him. He remembered 
nothing of the past and understood nothing of the present. All 
that he saw going on around him seemed but a dream; he had 
fled from his own house to escape the intolerable complications 
of daily life, and had sought and found a shelter in the house of 
Bazdéiew, whose memory was associated in his mind with a 
whole world of eternal peace and solemn calm, the very opposite 


143 


WAR AND PEACE 


of the feverish excitement which crushed him under its irre- 
sistible influence. Leaning on his dead friend’s dusty desk, in 
the deep silence of his study, his imagination painted with clear 
accuracy the events he had witnessed during the last few weeks, 
among them the battle of Borodino; and he again felt an inde- 
finable pain as he compared his own moral failure and life of 
falsehood with the mighty simplicity of the men whose image 
was stamped on his soul, and whom he thought of as “Them.” 

When Ghérassime roused him from his meditations, Peter, 
who had made up his mind to take part with the people in 
defending Moscow, asked him to procure him a disguise and a 
pistol, and announced his intention of remaining there, in con- 
cealment in the house. At first he found it impossible to fix 
his attention on the masonic manuscript; it reverted irresistibly 
to the cabalistic connection of his own name with that of 
Bonaparte. 

Still, the idea that he was predestined to put an end to the 
power of the “Beast” had as yet only occurred to him as a 
vague reverie, crossing his brain without leaving any trace. It 
was when chance had thrown him in the way of the Rostows 
and Natacha had exclaimed: “You are staying in Moscow! 
Ah, that is right—very right!” that he had understood that 
he would do well not to go away—even if the town were given 
up to the enemy—so as to fulfil his destiny. 

Next day, full of the thought that he must prove himself 
worthy of “Them,” he made his way to the barrier of the Three 
Hills; but when he had seen that Moscow would certainly not 
be defended, the execution of the scheme he had been vaguely 
cherishing for some days rose before him as an inexorable neces- 
sity. He must keep out of sight and try to come within reach 
of Napoleon; then he must kill him—die with him perhaps— 
but at any rate deliver Europe from the man who, in his opinion, 
was the cause of all her miseries. 

Peter was familiar with all the details of the attempt made 
on Napoleon at Vienna in 1809 by a German student. He 
knew that the student had been shot; but the danger he must 
run in fulfilling his providential task only excited him to greater 
zeal. Two feelings acted on him with equal strength: the first 
—the wish to sacrifice himself and suffer, which had been roused 
in his heart by the sight of the general misery, had carried him 
to Mojaisk and under fire, had driven him to quit his house, to 
give up the ease and comfort of his ordinary life, to sleep without 
undressing on a hard couch, ànd share Ghérassime's meagre 


144 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


fare. The second was that essentially Russian contempt for the 
accepted formulas of life and all that in the eyes of an immense 
majority goes to constitute its highest joys in this world. Peter 
had felt that intoxication for the first time at the Slobodski 
palace, where he had understood, too, that wealth, power, all 
that men most value, is in reality worthless but for the satis- 
faction of giving them up. It is the same instinct which leads 
the recruit to drink his last copper coin, and the drunkard to 
break windows and mirrors for no apparent reason, though he is 
well aware that he must drain his purse to pay for the damage; 
it is this which makes a man commit the most absurd actions, 
as if to prove his strength; and which is at the same time plain 
evidence of a superior Will, guiding human energy wheresoever 
It listeth. 

Peter’s physical condition corresponded to this mental state. 
The coarse food he had eaten during the last few days, the 
quantity of brandy he had drunk in his abstinence from wine 
and cigars, the impossibility of procuring any change of linen, 
his uneasy and sleepless nights on a sofa that was too short for 
him, all helped to keep him in a state of excitation bordering 


on frenzy. 


It was now two o’clock—and the French were in Moscow. 
Peter knew this, but instead of acting he only brooded over his 
scheme, thinking out the minutest details. It was not on the 
deed itself that his dreams centred, nor on the possible death of 
Napoleon, but on his own death and his heroic courage, on 
which he dwelt with melancholy pathos. “Ves, I must do it!” 
he thought to himself. “TI alone, for all—I will go up to him— 
so suddenly. Shall I take a dagger or a pistol? It matters 
not. It is not my hand but the hand of God that will deal 
the blow!...” And he thought of what he should say as 
he killed Napoleon: “Well, take me, lead me away to death!" 
he said firmly, and holding his head high. 

As he stood indulging in these foolish fancies the door of the 
room opened, and he saw on the threshold the usually placid 
face of Makar Alexéiévitch, now hardly recognisable. His 
dressing-gown hung loosely about him, his hot, bleared look, 
betrayed that he was drunk. As he caught sight of Peter, his 
expression was one of dull confusion, but he plucked up courage 
as he saw that Peter too seemed embarrassed, and went towards 
him, tottering on his weak shanks. 

“They were afraid,” he said, in a husky, good-humoured 


145 


WAR AND PEACE 


voice. “I said to them: ‘I will never surrender'—I did right, 
didn’t I?” Then seeing the pistol lying on the table, he 
suddenly seized it and rushed out of the room. 

Ghérassime and the porter ran after him to disarm him, while 
Peter looked on with disgust and pity for the half-crazy old 
man who, setting his face, gripped the weapon with all his 
might, calling out in a hoarse voice: *To arms! Board her, 
board her! It is a lie! You shall not have it!” 

“Come, come, be quiet, pray. Be quiet!” Ghérassime was 
Tepeating, as he tried to take him by the elbows and get him 
into a room. 

“And who are you? Bonaparte? Go, wretch! Do not 
lay hands on me. Do you see that?” cried the madman, 
brandishing the pistol. 

“Seize it!” cried Ghérassime to the dvornik. 

They had succeeded in pushing him into the vestibule, when 
a fresh shriek, a woman’s shrill cry, mingled with the noises 
they were all making—above them all the drunkard’s hoarse 
voice—and the cook rushed in, dreadfully scared. 

“Oh! father—there are four of them—four men on horse- 
back!” 

Ghérassime and the porter let go their hold of Makar Alexéié- 
vitch, and in the sudden silence they heard steps coming towards 
the front door. 


CHAPTER XLIX 


PETER—who had made up his mind that until he had executed 
his project he would reveal neither his name and rank, nor his 
knowledge of French, and that he would, if need should arise, 
vanish at the first approach of the enemy—remained standing 
at the door of the study. The Frenchmen came into the house, 
and Peter’s curiosity kept him riveted to the spot. 

There were but two: a tall and handsome officer and a soldier, 
evidently his servant, a lean and weather-beaten fellow, with 
hollow cheeks and a stupid face. The officer, who limped, 
came forward a little way leaning on his stick. He glanced 
round him, and finding the appearance of things to his liking, 
no doubt, he turned to some men who had stayed outside the 
door, and told them to bring up the horses. Then, twirling his 
moustache with a swagger, and lifting his hand to his cap in 


146 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


brief salute, he said with a jolly ring: “Good day to the company 
generally!” No one made any reply. “Are you in charge 
here,” he went on to Ghérassime, who looked at him with 
anxious inquiry. 

“Quarteer, quarteer, lodgings!” repeated the officer, good- 
naturedly slapping him on the shoulder. 

“The French are jolly good fellows, I can tell you! Come, 
what is the good of being angry, my worthy friend. I say, can 
no one speak French in this shop?” he asked, his eye happening 
to catch that of Peter. 

Peter drew back a step, and the officer again addressed 
Ghérassime, asking to see the rooms. 

“My master is not here—I do not understand,” said Ghéras- 
sime, trying to make himself clear in these few words of French. 

The Frenchman smiled with a half comic gesture of despair, 
and again looked towards Peter, who was about to withdraw 
altogether when he suddenly perceived, through a half open 
door, Makar Alexéiévitch with the pistol in his hand; with the 
cunning that often characterises madness, he was quietly taking 
aim at the Frenchman. 

“On board!” cried the lunatic, pressing the trigger. 

At this shout the French officer suddenly turned round, as 
Peter rushed upon the madman to seize the pistol. Makar 
Alexéiévitch had time to fire with his trembling fingers; the 
crack deafened them, and the room. was filled with smoke. The 
officer turned pale and started back, while Peter, forgetting his 
purpose of seeming not to know French, eagerly inquired 
whether he were wounded. 

«I do not think so, but I had a narrow escape that time,” 
said the officer, feeling himself all over, and pointing to the 
scraps of plaster that had fallen from the wall. “Who is that 
man?” he added, looking sternly at Peter. 

“Oh! I am really distressed beyond measure,” said Peter, 
entirely forgetting his part. "He is a wretched madman who 
does not know what he is doing.” 

The officer stepped up to the drunken wretch, and seized him 
by the collar; Makar Alexéiévitch hung his lip, and swayed 
heavily, leaning against the wall. 

“Rascal, you shall pay for it!” exclaimed the Frenchman. 
“We can be merciful after a victory, but we do not forgive a 
traitor!” and he shook his fist in energetic threat. 

Peter, still speaking French, implored him not to take ven- 
geance on a poor wretch who was half idiotic. The officer 


147 


WAR AND PEACE 


listened in silence, still scowling at the foe; but presently he 
smiled, and turning to Peter he looked at him for a few minutes, 
and then held out his hand with an excess of benevolence. 

“You have saved my live. You are a Frenchman!” he 
exclaimed. 

That was the Frenchman all over: only a Frenchman could 
do a great action; and this was beyond question one of the very 
greatest—to have saved the life of Monsieur Ramballe, captain 
of the 13th Dragoons. But, notwithstanding all the flattery 
implied by this opinion, Peter hastened to contradict it. 

“T am a Russian,” he said shortly. 

“Tell that to those who will believe it,” said the captain, 
with an incredulous wave of the hand. “You shall tell me all ~ 
about it by and by. I am charmed to meet a fellow-country- 
man. But what are we to do with this fellow?” he went on, 
addressing Peter as a comrade; for since he himself had pro- 
nounced that he was a Frenchman, there was nothing more to 
be said. Peter again explained who and what Makar Alexéié- 
vitch was, and how he had possessed himself of a loaded pistol; 
and he once more entreated him not to attempt to punish him. 

“You have saved my life!" replied the French officer, swelling 
with majesty. “You are a Frenchman— you ask his pardon, 
and I grant it you! Lead this man away!” he added, and 
taking Peter’s arm, he went with him into the study. 

The soldiers, who had come in on hearing the report of the 
pistol, seemed very ready to execute justice on the guilty man, 
but the captain stopped them sternly: 

“You will be sent for when you are wanted. Go!” 

The men went off, and the orderly who had been paying a 
visit to the kitchen came up to his master. 

“They have a leg of mutton, captain, and some soup. Shall 
I bring them up?” 

“Yes, and find some wine.” 


CHAPTER L 


PETER thought it his duty to renew his assurances that he was 
not a Frenchman, and he wished to retire, but his companion 
was so polite, amiable, and genial, that he had not the heart to 
refuse his invitation, and they sat down together in the drawing- 
room. The captain declared once more, with much hand- 
shaking, that he was bound to him for life by feelings of eternal 


148 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


gratitude, in spite of his strange. fancy to pass for a Russian. 
If he had been gifted with the faculty of guessing other men’s 
secret thoughts, Peter at that moment would probably have 
struck him dumb; as it was, his deficient penetration betrayed 
itself in an unceasing flow of chatter. 

“Whether you are a Frenchman or a Russian prince in dis- 
guise,” he said, glancing at Peter’s fine though dirty shirt, and 
the ring on his finger, “I owe you my life, and I offer you my 
friendship. A Frenchman never forgets an insult or a service.” 

There was so much kindliness and magnanimity—at any 
rate from the French point of view—in the tone of his voice 
and the expression of his face and movements, that Peter in- 
voluntarily responded by a smile and pressed the hand he held 
out to him. 

“I am Captain Ramballe of the 13th Dragoons, and decorated 
for the affair of the 17th. Will you do me the honour to inform 
me with whom I have the pleasure of conversing so agreeably 
at this moment instead of lying in hospital with a bullet in 
my body?” 

Peter coloured as he replied that he could not tell him his 
name, and tried to invent some plausible excuse for refusing 
to satisfy his curiosity. 

“Pray, pray—” interrupted the Frenchman. “I can quite 
understand your reasons; you are no doubt some officer of 
superior rank. You have borne arms against us. It is no 
concern of mine. I owe you my life and that is enough. Iam 
yours to command. You are a gentleman—” he added, with 
a shade of interrogation. Peter bowed. 

“Your Christian name? Mr. Peter—nothing can be better; 
that is all I ask to know.” 

When the mutton was served, with an omelette, the samovar 
was brought in and some wine and brandy that had been found 
in a neighbouring cellar; Ramballe begged Peter to share his 
meal. and he himself set to work with a will like a hungry and 
healthy man, smacking his lips and eating with an accompani- 
ment of satisfied exclamations: “Capital, delicious!" His face 
had gradually flushed. Peter, who was equally hungry, also 
did honour to the food. Morel, the orderly, brought in a pan 
of warm water in which he stood a bottle of red wine, placing on 
the table a bottle of kvass; the French had already invented 
a name for this national drink, calling it “Pig’s lemonade.” 
Morel sang its praises, but as the captain had some good wine 
before him he left the kvass to his man. He wrapped his napkin 


149 


WAR AND PEACE 


round the bottle of Bordeaux and poured out a large glassful 
for himself and for Peter. As soon as his appetite was satisfied 
and the bottle empty he began to talk again with fresh vehemence. 

“Yes, my dear Mr. Peter, I owe you a votive offering for 
having saved me from that maniac. You see I have enough 
bullets in me already; here is one—I got that at Wagram,” 
and he touched his side; “number two I got at Smolensk,” 
and he showed a scar on his cheek. “And this leg which 
doesn’t work is a souvenir of the fight on the 17th at the Moskva. 
By G——,, that was something like! You should have seen it; 
a deluge of fire. You gave us an uncommonly tough job; and 
you may boast of that, by G——! And, upon my word, in spite 
of this cough that it has cost me I would begin all over again ~ 
to-morrow! I pity those who did not see it!” 

“I was there," said Peter. 

"No! Were you really? So much the better! And you 
are a noble enemy, say what they will. The great redoubt held 
firm, by heaven! and you made us pay for it handsomely. 
Three times we were right upon the guns and three times you 
knocked us over like a pack of cards. Oh! it was grand, Mr. 
Peter! Your grenadiers were superb, by thunder! I saw 
them close up six times, and march as if it were a review. 
What fine men! Our King of Naples cried bravo! and he 
know's what's what. Soldiers to match our own!" he added, 
after a moment's silence. “Well, well, so much the better. 
Terrible in battle and gallant with the ladies—that is your 
Frenchman, eh, Mr. Peter?" and he winked his eye. The 
captain's high spirits were so naive and frank, and he was so 
perfectly pleased with himself that Peter could hardly help 
winking in return. 

The word gallant no doubt reminded the captain of the state 
of Moscow, for he went on: *By the way, is it true that all 
the women have left the city? What a monstrous idea! What 
had they to be afraid of?” 

“And would not the French ladies leave Paris if the Russians 
marched in?" asked Peter. 

“Ha, ha!” the Frenchman shouted with laughter as he 
slapped him on the shoulder. “Ha, ha! That is a good one. 
Why, Pans} Parisa i 4? 

“Paris is the capital of the world?” said Peter, finishing 
the sentence. 

The captain’s laughing eyes were fixed on him. 

“Well,” he said, “if you had not told me that you were a 


150 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


Russian I would have bet that you were a Parisian. You have 
the air, the manner. . . .” 

*I have been to Paris, I lived there several years," said Peter. 

“Oh! that is very evident. Paris! Why, the man who does 
not know Paris is a savage. You can smell your Parisian 
two leagues off. Paris is Talma, la Duchesnois, Pottier, the 
Sorbonne, the Boulevards . . ." then, perceiving that the end 
of his sentence had no connection with the beginning, he hastily 
added: “There is but one Paris! And you have lived in Paris 
and can remain a Russian? Well, I think none the worse of 
you for that." 

Under the influence of wine, and after the lonely days he 
had just spent with no company but his own gloomy thoughts, 
Peter involuntarily found real pleasure in his gay corapanion's 
small talk. 

“To return to the ladies; the Russians are said to be beauti- 
ful! What an idiotic notion to go and bury themselves in the 
steppes when the French army is at Moscow. They have lost 
a chance, I can tell you. Your moujiks of course are mere 
dolts; but you of the civilised classes ought to know us better 
than that. We have occupied Vienna, Berlin, Madrid, Naples, 
Rome, Warsaw, all the capitals in the world. We are feared, 
but we are loved! We are capital company. Besides, the 
emperor. . . ." But Peter interrupted him with a gloomy 
and bewildered look. 

“The emperor,” he repeated, “what of the emperor?” 

“The emperor is generosity, clemency, justice and genius 
itself—that is the emperor. And I, Ramballe, say it—I as 
you see me—was his sworn foe eight years ago. My father 
was a count and an émigré. But the man conquered me, 
swept me before him! I could not resist him when I saw the 
greatness and glory he heaped on France. When I understood 
what he was aiming at, when I saw that he was making us a 
perfect bed of laurels, you see, I said to myself: This is some- 
thing like a sovereign! And I gave myself up to him. And 
here I am! Yes, my dear fellow, he is the greatest man of 
any age past or to come!” 


&Is he in Moscow?” asked Peter hesitatingly, in the tone of 


a guilty man. 

The Frenchman looked at the guilty face and gave a short 
laugh. 

“No, but he will make his entry to-morrow,” replied the 


. 


Frenchman going on with his story. Their conversation was 


151 


WAR AND PEACE 


interrupted at this point by a noise of voices at the outer gate, 
and Morel came in to explain to his master that the Wurtem- 
berg Hussars insisted on putting their horses into the same 
yard as theirs. The cause of the dispute was the fact that the 
men could not understand each other. Ramballe sent for the 
German quartermaster and asked him sternly to what regiment 
he belonged, and how he dared to take possession of quarters 
that were already occupied. The man gave him the name of 
his regiment and that of his colonel; and as he knew very 
little French, and did not understand Ramballe’s last remark 
at all, he broke out in voluble German, interlarded with a few 
doubtful words of French, in which he sought to explain that 
he was the quartermaster-sergeant of his regiment, and that 
his commander had desired him to find quarters in this street. 
Peter, knowing German, served as interpreter on both sides ; 
the Wurtemberger was finally overruled and led his men 
elsewhere. 

When the captain came back again, after leaving the room 
for a moment to give his orders, he found Peter with his elbows 
on the table, and his head in his hands. His expression was 
one of suffering; but, painful and bitter as the immediate state 
of affairs could not fail to be to him, his real grief was not that 
Moscow was taken and that its fortunate conquerors were 
making themselves at home there, but in the consciousness of 
his own weakness. A few glasses of good wine, a few words 
with this jolly fellow, had been enough to clear his mind of 
that dark and determined mood which had so entirely possessed 
him during the last few days and without which he could not 
carry out his project. His disguise, his dagger, were ready; 
Napoleon was to enter Moscow on the next day; the killing of 
the "villain" was no less useful, no less heroic than it had 
been yesterday, but Peter no longer felt capable of committing 
the deed. Why? He could not have said; but he felt vaguely 
that strength failed him, and that all his dreams of revenge, 
murder, and personal devotion had vanished like smoke at the 
living contact of the first comer. The Frenchman's chatter, 
which before had amused him was now intolerable. His manner, 
his gesticulations, his moustache as he curled it, the tune he 
whistled between his teeth—everything worried him: 

“I will go away, I will not speak to him again," said Peter 
to himself; but even though he thought it, he did not move. 
A strange feeling of impotency rooted him to his place; he 
wanted to rise, and he could not. The captain, on the con- 


152 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


trary was radiant; he paced up and down the room, his eyes 
glistened, and he smiled at some comical fancy of his own. 

“A charming fellow, the Wurtemberg colonel," he said, “and 
a brave man if ever there was one but—a German." He sat 
down opposite Peter. “Regular brutes the Germans—don't you 
think so, Mr. Peter? Another bottle of this Moscow Bordeaux. 
Morel will warm us another bottle." 

Morel placed it on the table with the candles, and by their 
light the captain observed his companion's disturbed expres- 
sion. Genuine sympathy led him to make advances. He took 
his hand kindly: “We are very sad," he said. * Have I hurt 
you in any way? Have you any bone to pick with me?" 
Peter's reply was a glance which told the Frenchman on the 
contrary how deeply he appreciated his sympathy. “On my 
honour, quite apart from the gratitude I owe you, I feel the 
warmest regard for you. In what can I serve you? You have 
only to command me. It is for life or death!” he added, 
striking his chest. 

“Thank you,” said Peter. “Nothing.” 

“Well then, I drink to our friendship!” cried the captain, 
and he poured out two glasses of wine. Peter took one and 
swallowed it ata gulp. Ramballe followed his example, pressed 
his hand once more, and then propped his elbow on the table 
with a melancholy look. 

“Ves, my dear fellow,” he began. “These are the freaks of 
fortune. Who could have ever foretold that I should turn 
soldier and be a captain of dragoons in Bonaparte’s service 
as we used to call him then. And here I am with him at 
Moscow! I must tell you, my dear fellow," he went on, in the 
sad even tone of a man who has a long story to tell, “that 
our name is one of the oldest in France. . . .” And the cap- 
tain went on to relate, with a frank ease, the whole history of 
his ancestors, the principal events of his early youth, his boyhood 
and his riper years, omitting nothing of his family connections 
and relationships. “But all that is the petty side of life: the 
real foundation of it is love! Love, don’t you think so, Mr. 
Peter? Come, another glass!” he added, cheering up a little. 

Peter drank a second glass, and poured himself out a third. 

“Oh! women, women!” the captain went on, and his eyes 
assumed a languishing expression as he recalled his adventures 
with the ladies; he must have had a great many by his own 
account, and his conquering air, his handsome face, and the 
enthusiasm with which he spoke of the fair sex made it probable. 


153 


WAR AND PEACE 


Though his confidences had the licentious taint which, in a 
Frenchman’s eyes, constitutes all the poetry of love, he spoke 
with such entire conviction, and attributed such powerful 
charms to women, that it seemed as though he were the only 
man who had ever really appreciated them. 

Peter listened curiously. It was quite clear that love, as the 
Frenchman understood the word, was not that sensual passion 
that Peter had once felt for his wife, nor yet the romantic 
sentiment which he cherished for Natacha—two kinds of love 
which Ramballe held in equal contempt. ‘‘The one," he would 
say, “is all very well for carters, and the other for nincompoops." 
To him the chief charm of love lay in odd coincidences and 
unnatural situations. i 

Thus the captain narrated a dramatic episode of his double 
passion for a fascinating marquise of five-and-thirty, and her 
innocent daughter of seventeen. They had vied with each 
other in generosity, and their rivalry had ended in the mother's 
sacrificing herself and offering him her daughter as his wife. 
This reminiscence, though of the remote past, still agitated the 
captain. Another story was that of a husband who had played 
the lover's part while he, the lover, took that of the husband. 
Then came a series of comical anecdotes relating to his stay in 
Germany, where the husbands eat too much sauer kraut, and 
the young girls are too colourless. And finally his latest 
romance, in Poland, of which the impression was still fresh in 
his mind, to judge by the expression of his mobile countenance 
when he described the gratitude'of a Polish gentleman of rank 
whose life he had saved—a detail which was not wanting in 
any one of the captain's gasconades. This gentleman had 
entrusted his wife, a most enchanting creature, a Parisian at 
heart, to the captain's keeping when he found himself obliged 
to leave her and serve in the French army. Ramballe was 
happy, for the fair Pole had agreed to elope with him, but a 
chivalrous sentiment had made itself heard; he had restored 
the lady to her husband, saying: “I saved your life once, and 
now I have saved your honour.” As he quoted himself, he 
passed his hand over his eyes with a little shudder, as though 
to throw off an emotion which was too much for him. 

Peter, who was feeling the effects of the wine and the late 
hour, as he listened to the captain's recollections, linked with 
them a whole series of memories of his own. His love for 
Natacha suddenly rose before him in a succession of pictures 
which he compared with those described by Ramballe. When 


154 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


the captain enlarged on the struggle between love and duty, 
Peter was reminded of every detail of his last meeting with the 
young girl he loved—though at the moment, it must be owned, 
that meeting had not particularly impressed him; in fact, he 
had forgotten it, but now poetical significancy seemed to lurk 
in every detail. “Peter Kirilovitch, come here, I recognised 
you!" He fancied he could hear her voice, see her eyes, her 
smile, her little travelling-hood and a lock of hair blown back 
by the wind—the vision touched and moved him deeply. 

When the captain had finished his description of the charms 
of his Pole, he asked Peter whether he too had sacrificed love 
to duty, or had ever been jealous of a husband's rights. Peter 
looked up, and led on by a craving to pour out his heart, he 
explained that he looked at love from a different point of 
view: that in all his life he had never loved but one woman, 
and she could never be his. “Bless me!” said the captain. 
Then Peter confided to him how he had loved her from child- 
hood without daring to think of her because she was too young; 
that he was a natural son, with no name nor fortune; and that 
since a name and fortune had been given him he loved her so 
entirely, and regarded her as so far above all the world, and 
himself included, that he thought it impossible to win her love. 
At this point in his confession Peter interrupted himself to ask 
the captain if he understood him. The Frenchman shrugged 
his shoulders and bid him go on. 

“Platonic love! Moonshine!” he muttered to himself. 

Was it the effect of the wine that led him to open his heart, 
or the need to express himself, or the certainty that this man 
would never know any of the people of whom he was speaking? 
The fact was that he told him his whole history, with a heavy 
tongue and his eyes fixed on vacancy; his marriage, Natacha’s 
love for his dearest friend, her inconstancy, and their still ill- 
defined position towards each other. Nay, under a little pressure 
from Ramballe, he ended by acknowledging his rank and even 
his name. And in all the long story what chiefly struck the 
captain was the fact that Peter owned two fine palaces in 
Moscow which he had abandoned to their fate to remain in 
the town in disguise. 

The night was mild and clear, and at a very late hour they 
went out of doors together. On the left the first lurid gleams 
were rising of the fire that was to devour Moscow. On the 
right, high up in the sky, shone a new moon, and opposite to 
it, on the brink of the horizon, blazed the comet which was so 


455 


WAR AND PEACE 


mysteriously associated in Peter’s mind with his love for 
Natacha. Ghérassime, the cook, and the two Frenchmen were 
standing outside the gate; they could hear their loud laughter 
and noisy conversation in two languages. Their attention, too, 
was directed to the glare now spreading in the distance, though 
as yet there was no immediate threat in those remote flames, 
there was nothing terrible in this far-off fire. 

As he gazed at the starry sky, the moon, the comet, the 
ruddy glare, Peter was deeply moved. 

“How beautiful!" he thought. “What more can one want? ” 
And then he suddenly remembered his scheme; he turned 
giddy, and must have fallen if he had not clung to the paling. 
Then turning away from his new friend, without even bidding 
him good night, he made his way with uncertain steps to his 
own room, lay down on the sofa, and fell asleep. 


CHAPTER LI 


Tue light of the first fire on the r4th September was seen 
from many sides at once, and produced very different effects on 
the inhabitants who were escaping and the troops who were 
forced to retreat. 

In consequence of the numerous articles they had forgotten, 
and had sent back for in succession, the Rostows had not got 
fairly off till the afternoon; they were consequently obliged to 
spend the night at about five versts out of town. Next day 
having risen rather late, and meeting with obstacles at every 
turn in tbe road, they only reached the village of Bolchaia- 
Mytichtchi at ten in the evening; there the family and the 
wounded men found quarters for the night in the peasants' 
huts. As soon as their work was done all the servants, coach- 
men, and officers' servants, supped themselves, fed their horses, 
and gathered in the village street. In one of the huts was 
Raievsky's aide-de-camp; his wrist had been smashed, and he 
suffered horribly, and his groans were dismally audible in the 
calm, dark autumn night. Countess Rostow, who had occupied 
the room next to his the previous night, had not slept a wink 
and she had now chosen an :sba farther away from the hapless 
sufferer. 

One of the servants suddenly perceived a second blaze on the 
horizon; the first they had already ascribed to Mamonow’s 


156 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


Cossacks, who—it was said—had set fire to the village of 
Malaia-Mytichtchi. 

“Look out, lads; there is another blaze,” he said. They all 
looked round. 

“Yes, so there is! They say that Mamonow’s Cossacks have 
set the place on fire.” 

“Not a bit of it! That is not the village, it is much farther 
off; it might be Moscow.” 

Two of the men made their way round a carriage which hid 
the horizon, and perched themselves on the step. 

“Tt is more to the left—there, do you see the flames dancing 
up? That is Moscow, my friends, Moscow is burning.” 

No one took the matter up and they stood gazing at the 
fresh glare which was spreading rapidly. Daniel, the count’s 
old valet, came out and called Michka. “What are you staring 
at, gaby? The count will call and there will be no one to 
answer. Go and put his clothes away.” 

“I only came out for some water." 

“What do you think about it, Daniel Térentitch? Is not 
that Moscow?” 

Daniel did not reply, and no one spoke; the flame rose with 
increasing violence and spread rapidly. 

* Lord have mercy upon us! The wind and this drought ——" 
said a voice. 

“Lord, Lord! how it is growing! You can see the daws tly 
up. Lord have mercy upon us miserable sinners!” 

* Don't be afraid; they will put it out." 

* Who will put it out?" said Daniel Térentitch suddenly in 
a solemn voice. “Yes, that is Moscow burning sure enough, 
my children, Moscow, our white-walled mother.” 

His voice broke with a sob; and then—as if they had only 
been waiting for this terrible sentence to understand the fearful 
meaning of the red glare in the sky—groans and prayers rose 
from the whole assembly. 


iy 


WAR AND PEACE 


CHAPTER LII 


THE old valet went to tell his master that Moscow was on 
fire; the count slipped on his dressing-gown and went out to 
assure himself of the fact, accompanied by Sonia and Mrs Schoss, 
who were not yet undressed. Natacha and her mother were 
left alone in their room. Pétia had parted from them that 
morning to join his regiment on the way to Troitsk. At the 
news of the conflagration the countess began to weep, while 
Natacha, sitting, with a fixed gaze, on a bench in the corner 
near the images, paid no heed to her father’s words. She was 
listening involuntarily to the lamentations of the hapless aide- 
de-camp, which she could hear distinctly though there were 
three or four cottages between them. 

“Oh! what a fearful sight!” cried Sonia, coming in horror- 
stricken. “All Moscow is on fire, I beiieve; the blaze is 
stupendous. Look, Natacha, you can see from here." 

Natacha turned round without seeming to understand what 
Sonia was saying, and then fixed her eyes on the corner of the 
stove. She had fallen into a sort of lethargy ever since the 
morning when Sonia, to the astonishment and great annoyance 
of the countess, had thought proper to inform her that Prince 
Andrew was among the wounded who were travelling with 
them, and had told her what serious danger he was in. The 
countess had been more furious with Sonia then she had ever 
been in her life. Sonia, in floods of tears, had implored her 
forgiveness, and been doubly attentive to her cousin to repair 
the mischief. 

“Do look, Natacha, how it is burning!” 

“What is burning?” said Natacha. “Ah! to be sure, 
Moscow!" and, simply to satisfy Sonia without offending her, 
she looked out of the window, and then resumed her former 
attitude. 

“But you could see nothing.” 

"I saw it all, I assure you," she said in beseeching tones 
which seemed only to crave that she might be left in peace. 
The countess and Sonia understood indeed that she could just 
now take no interest in anything. Her father withdrew behind 
the partition and went to bed. The countess came up to her 
daughter, felt her head with the back of her hand as she was 
wont to do when she was ill, and pressed her lips to her forehead 
to see whether she was feverish. 


158 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


“You are cold," she said as she kissed her. “You are 
shivering; you ought to go to bed." 

“To bed? Oh! yes, I shall go to bed by and by,” she replied. 

When Natacha had heard that Prince Andrew had been 
dangerously wounded and that he was travelling in their com- 
pany, she had asked endless questions as to how and when it 
had happened, and whether she might not see him. She was 
told that this was impossible, that the wound was a serious one, 
but that there was no immediate danger. Being fully convinced 
that, urge it as she might, she would learn nothing more, she 
had sat silent and motionless in the back of the carriage, as she 
was now sitting on the stool in the corner of the room. As 
she saw her wide open eyes and fixed gaze the countess felt sure 
from long experience that her daughter was hatching some 
scheme in her brain; and the decision it might lead to—to her 
unknown—caused her extreme anxiety. 

“Natacha, my child, undress; come to bed with me." Only 
the countess had a bed; Mrs. Schoss and the girls had a heap 
of hay on the floor. 

*No, mamma; I will lie there on the ground," said Natacha 
impatiently ; she rose, went to the window and threw it open. 

The wounded man was still moaning; she put her head out 
into the damp night air, and her mother could see her shaking 
with convulsive sobs. Natacha knew that this sufferer was not 
Prince Andrew; she knew, too, that he was in the hut next 
their own; but these incessant plaints moved her irresistibly 
to tears. The countess glanced at Sonia. “Come, my child, 
come to bed," she repeated, laying her head gently on Natacha's 
shoulder. 

*Oh! yes, at once!" exclaimed Natacha, snatching off her 
clothes and breaking her strings to be quicker. She put on 
her sleeping-jacket and sat down on the bed that had been 
arranged for them; then throwing her hair down over her 
shoulders she began to undo it. While her slim fingers un- 
plaited and replaited it, her head mechanically following their 
movement, her eyes, dilated with fever, still stared at vacancy. 
Having finished, she gently dropped on to the sheet which was 
laid over the hay. 

* Natacha, go into the middle!" 

“No, lie down,” she said. “I shall stay where I am,” and 
she buried her head in the pillow. 

The countess, Sonia, and Mrs. Schoss all undressed, and ere 
long the pale glimmer of a night-lamp was the only light in the 


159 


WAR AND PEACE 


room, though outside, the blazing village only two versts away, 
shone on the horizon. Confused sounds came up from the 
village tavern, and the aide-de-camp was still grcaning. 
Natacha listened for a long time to all these noises, taking care 
not to stir. She heard her mother sighing and praying, and 
the bed creak under her weight; Mrs. Schoss’s piping snore; 
and Sonia's soft breathing. Presently the countess spoke her 
daughter's name, but Natacha did not answer. “Mamma, 
I think she is asleep," said Sonia. 

A few minutes later the countess spoke again, but this time 
Sonia even did not answer, and very soon Natacha knew from 
her mother’s deep breathing that she, too, was asleep. She 
did not move, though the little bare foot peeping out now and 
then from under the clothes shivered at the touch of the cold 
floor. A cricket’s shrill chirp was audible from some chink . 
in the beams; he seemed quite proud of being awake when all 
the rest of the world was asleep. A cock crowed in the distance 5 
another answered close at hand; the shouts in the tavern had 
ceased—only the wounded man was still moaning. 

From the moment when Natacha had heard that Prince 
Andrew was of their party, she had made up her mind to see 
him; but while she felt this to be inevitable she also knew it 
must be painful. The hope of seeing him had kept her up all 
through the day, but, now that the moment was come, she was 
a prey to nameless terrors. Was he disfigured or altered, as 
she pictured the wounded man whose cries haunted her so 
persistently? Yes, he must be—for in her fancy this heart- 
rending wailing had got mixed up with the image of Prince 
Andrew. 

Natacha sat up. 

“Sonia, are you asleep? Mamma?” she whispered. 

No answer. She rose very softly, crossed herself, and setting 
her light foot on the boards, stole softly across the dirty floor 
which creaked under her weight, and reached the door as nimbly 
as a kitten. There she grasped the latch. It seemed to her 
that the partitions of the cottage rang with blows hit in steady 
rhythm, while it was her heart that was beating almost to burst- 
ing with terror and passion. She opened the door, crossed the 
threshold, and set her naked feet on the damp floor of the 
covered way between the two houses. The cold chill roused 
her; her bare foot just touched a man lying asleep on the 
ground, and then she opened the door of the hut in which 
Prince Andrew was lying. 


160 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


It was dark; behind the bed, which stood in a corner, and 
on which she could make out a vague form, a candle was burning 
on a bench, and the tallow had guttered into a sort of hood. 
As she caught sight of the shapeless mass—taking the feet, 
which stuck up under the counterpane, for the shoulders—she 
fancied it something so monstrous, that she stood still in horror; 
but then an irresistible impulse urged her forward Stepping 
with great care she reached the middle of the room, which was 
crammed with luggage of all kinds, in a corner under the images 
a man was lying on a bench: this was Timokhine. The doctor 
and valet were sleeping on the floor. The valet turned over, 
muttering a few words. Timokhine, who was suffering from a 
wound in the foot, was not asleep; he fixed his astonished eyes 
on this amazing apparition of a young girl in a sleeping-jacket 
and nightcap. His faintly murmured words of alarm: “What 
is it? Who is there?” only made Natacha move quicker, and 
she found herself standing by the object that had filled her with 
terror. However dreadful it might be to look at, she felt that 
she must see it. At that moment the smoky candle flared up a 
little, and she distinctly saw Prince Andrew, his hands lying on 
the coverlet, looking just as she had always known him; but 
that the bright flush of fever, the glittering eyes that looked at 
her with rapture, and the delicate throat, like a young boy’s, 
in its setting of a turned-down shirt-collar, gave him an appear- 
ance of candid youthfulness that was new to her. She went 
forward quickly, and with a swift and graceful impulse fell on 
her knees by his side. He smiled and put out his hand. 


CHAPTER LIII 


Seven days had passed since Prince Andrew had first come to 
himself in the hospital tent after the operation. The fever 
and inflammation of the intestines, which had been injured 
by a fragment of shell, would prove almost immediately fatal, 
in the doctor's opinion; so that he was amazed on the seventh 
day to see him eat a few mouthfuls of bread with real enjoyment, 
and to be able to note a perceptible diminution in the inflamma- 
tory symptoms. Prince Andrew had quite recovered his senses. 

The night after their start from Moscow had been fairly 
warm, and he had not been moved from his travelling-carriage; 
but as soon as they reached this village, he had begged to be 


161 


WAR AND PEACE 


carried into a house, and to have some tea; but the anguish 
of being lifted, only from the chariot into the hut, had brought 
on a fainting fit. When they laid him on his camp-bed he 
remained for some time motionless, with his eyes shut, then 
he opened them again, and asked for the tea. To the surgeon’s 
astonishment he remembered this minute detail; and on feeling 
his pulse, the doctor found it more regular, to his great regret, 
for he knew by experience that Prince Andrew was irrevocably 
doomed, and any extension of his days could only result in 
prolonged and acute suffering, to end after all in death. Little 
Timokhine, with the red nose, who was wounded in the leg at 
Borodino, joined Prince Andrew when they left Moscow. They 
had also the prince’s valet, a doctor, a coachman, and two 
soldier-servants. 

A glass of tea was brought to him, and he drank it greedily, 
while his eyes, fastened on the door, seemed trying to recover 
the chain of some confused reminiscences. 

“No more,” he said. “Is Timokhine there?” The man 
dragged himself along his bench. “Here, excellency." 

“How is your wound going on?” 

"Mine? Oh, it is a trifle. How are you feeling? " 

Prince Andrew lay thinking, as if trying to remember what 
he had to say. 

“Could they get me a book?” he asked. 

“What book?” 

“The New Testament—I have not got one.” 

The doctor promised him a New Testament, and asked him 
how he was feeling. Though he answered reluctantly, he was 
perfectly clear. He begged them to place a pillow under his 
loins to ease his pain. The doctor and valet raised the cloak 
which covered him to examine the fearful wound, of which the 
smell made them feel sick. The inspection was not satisfactory ; 
the doctor dressed the wound, and turned the sufferer over a 
little, but this made him again unconscious, and he then became 
light-headed; he insisted on having the book at once, and that 
it should be placed under him. 

“What harm can it do you?” he said plaintively. “Give 
it me, and put it there if only for a minute.” 

The doctor left the room to wash his hands. 

“Good Heavens!” he said to the manservant who poured 
out the water. “How can he live through such torture?” 

When the carriage had stopped at the village of Mytichtchi 
Prince Andrew had been, for the first time, in full possession 


162 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


of his senses: had a clear recollection of the past, and under- 
stood the state he was in. Then the pain of being lifted into 
the cottage had clouded his mind again till the tea had recovered 
him, and memory brought back the various scenes of the last 
few days, especially the delusive mirage of calm bliss which 
had floated before him in the ambulance tent while listening 
to the cries of the man he so detested. The same vague and 
confused thoughts took possession of him once more: he was 
conscious of the same pervading sense of ineffable happiness, 
with a feeling that he should find that happiness only in the 
. Gospel he had so eagerly implored to have given to him. 

Under the pain of having his wound dressed, and of being 
moved into a fresh position, he again lost consciousness, and 
he did not recover it till shortly before midnight. Atl were 
sunk in sleep; he heard the chirp of the cricket in the adjoining 
isba; a drunken voice was singing in the street; cockroaches 
were rustling as they scampered over the table, the images, 
and the wainscot; a large fly buzzed and blundered into the 
guttering candle. 

A man in health can reflect and feel and remember a thousand 
things at a time, and select certain facts or ideas on which to fix 
his attention. He can, at need, rouse himself from deep absorp- 
tion to speak politely to anyone who addresses him, and then 
resume the course of his ideas; but Prince Andrew was not in 
this normal condition. While his moral powers had become 
more active and keener than of old, they acted without any 
control from his will. The most dissimilar thoughts and visions 
crowded on his mind; for a few minutes his thoughts had a 
clearness and depth which they had never had when he was in 
health, and then suddenly all sorts of fantastic and unlooked-for 
images ruthlessly wrecked the work of his brain which he was 
too weak to begin again. 

*'Yes—a new type of happiness was revealed to me,” he 
thought, and his eyes, glittering with fever, sounded the gloom 
of the quiet cottage room, “happiness of which nothing can 
henceforth deprive me—independent of all earthly influences. 
The happiness of the soul, of love! All men are capable of 
knowing it, but God alone has the power of bestowing it on 
them. How came He to make this law of love? Why did the 
Son. . . .?" The thread of his ideas was suddenly broken; 
he thought a voice was humming a tune incessantly in his ear 
-—was it reality or delirium? 

As he listened to the confused sounds, he felt a structure, as 


163 


WAR AND PEACE 


it were, rising from his face, of fine needles and airy shavings, 
and he devoted his whole effort to preserving his balance so 
as to save his aerial edifice from falling; though it vanished 
now and then to rise once more in rhythm to the cadence of 
that mysterious murmur. 

“Tt is rising! I see it!” he said to himself; and without 
taking his eyes off it he could see, flitting across it, the ruddy 
flame of the half-burnt candle, and he could hear the scuttering 
cockroaches on the floor, and the buzz of the big fly that bounced 
against his pillow. Each time the fly brushed his cheek, it 
burnt him like a hot iron, and he wondered how it was that the 
touch of its wings did not demolish the strange fabric of needles 
and shavings that rested on his face. And out there, by the 
door—what was that sinister shape, that motionless sphinx 
which seemed to smother him? 

“It is my shirt, no doubt, that has been left on the table! 
But then how is it that everything is swelling and spreading 
and spinning round me? Why that monotonous voice singing 
in time?" said the hapless sufferer in aggravated anguish— 
and on a sudden his thoughts and ideas were clearer and stronger 
than ever. * Yes—Love! Not selfish love, but love such as 
I then knew it for the first time in my life, when dying I saw 
my enemy by my side, and could love even him! It is the very 
essence of the soul which does not cling to only one object of 
its affection—and that is what I now feel. Love of one's 
neighbour, of one's enemy, of each and all, is the love of God in 
all His manifestations! To love those near and dear to us is 
human love; but to love one's enemy is almost divine. That 
was the reason of my gladness when I found that I loved that 
man. Where is he? Is he still living? Human love may turn 
to hatred, but divine love is perennial. How many people 
I have hated in the course of my life! And did I not hate most 
of all her whom I had loved most of all? . . .” 

The image of Natacha rose before him, not in the fascination 
of her external charms alone; he saw into her soul, he under- 
stood her anguish, her shame and repentance; and he reproached 
himself for his own cruelty in having thrown her off. 

“If only I might see her,” thought he. “If only I could 
look into her eyes once more and tell her . . . Oh! that fly!” 
And fancy again bore him away into the world of hallucination 
mingling with reality, in which he saw, as through a mist, the 
structure built up from his face, the candle burning in a red 
halo, and the sphinx watching near the door. 


164 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


Presently he heard a slight noise, a breath of cooler air fanned 
his face, and another white figure, a second sphinx, appeared in 
the doorway. Its face was pale, and its eyes shone like the eyes 
of Natacha. 

“Oh! how weary I am of this delirium!” thought Prince 
Andrew, trying to shake off this vision. 

But the vision did not vanish—it came nearer—it seemed to 
be real. Prince Andrew made a great effort to return to the 
realm of pure thought, but his delusions were too strong for 
him. The murmuring voice still hummed on; something weighed 
on his chest—and that strange figure was still gazing at him. 
Collecting all his strength to recover his wits he moved—there 
was a ringing in his ears, he saw no more, and lost consciousness. 
When he came to himself Natacha—Natacha in the flesh—she 
whom he most longed to love with that pure, divine passion that 
had just been revealed to him, was there, on her knees, by his 
side. He recognised her so completely, that he felt no surprise, 
only a sense of ineffable gladness. Natacha was too terrified 
to dare to move; she tried to smother her sobs and her pale 
face quivered. 

Prince Andrew gave a deep sigh of relief, smiled, and put out 
his hand. 

“You?” he said. "What happiness!" 

Natacha eagerly went closer, took his hand very gently and 
touched it with her lips. 

“Forgive me," she murmured, looking up. “Forgive me." 

“I love you," he said. 

“Forgive me.” 

* What have I to forgive? " 

“Forgive me for what I did," said Natacha, in a low voice, 
'and with a painful effort. 

“T love you better than I did before," replied Prince Andrew, 
lifting her head to look in her eyes, which were timidly fixed 
on his, swimming with tears of joy, but luminous with love 
and pity. Her pale, thin features, and lips swollen with crying, 
had, at this moment, no trace of beauty; but Prince Andrew 
saw nothing but her beautiful eyes radiant through tears. 

Peter, his valet, who had just woke up, shook the doctor. 
Timokhine was not asleep; he had seen all that had happened, 
and now tried to hide himself under his sheet. 

“What is the meaning of this?" said the doctor, sitting up. 
* You must have the goodness to withdraw, miss." 

At this moment a maid knocked at the door; she was sent 


165 


WAR AND PEACE 


by the countess to find Natacha. Natacha walked out of the 
room like a sleep-walker who is suddenly roused, and as soon 
as she got back to their own quarters fell sobbing on the bed. 


From that time, at every stage or resting-place on their 
journey, Natacha went in to see Bolkonsky, and the doctor 
was forced to confess that he never could have expected to find 
in a young girl so much steadiness or apprehension of the care 
needed for a wounded man. However dreadful the countess 
might deem it that Prince Andrew should die—as the doctor 
prognosticated—in her daughter’s arms, she could not resist 
Natacha’s determination. Their revived intercourse would 
certainly under any other circumstances have led to a renewal 
of their old engagement; but the question of life and death 
that hung over Prince Andrew’s head was no less in suspense 
for Russia itself; and every other consideration fell into the 
background. 


CHAPTER LIV 


On the 3rd (15th) of September Peter rose late. His head 
ached; his clothes, which he had not taken off, hung heavy 
on his limbs, and he had a vague impression that he had done 
some shameful act the evening before: this was his overflow 
of confession to Captain Ramballe. It was eleven o'clock, the 
weather was gloomy; he rose, rubbed his eyes, and seeing the 
pistol, which Ghérassime had replaced on the desk, he remem- 
bered at last where he was, and what he was to do that day: 
“Am I not too late?" he wondered. “No, for he was not to 
enter the city till midday." 

Peter gave himself no time to think of what he had to do; 
he hastened to act. He brushed down his coat with his hand, 
snatched up the pistol, and was just going out when it occurred 
to him to ask himself where he should hide the weapon. He 
could not stick it in his belt, nor carry it under his arm, nor 
conceal it in the folds of his caftan; and, finally, he had forgotten 
to load it. “A dagger will be better after all," thought he, 
though he had more than once blamed the German student, 
who in 1809 had tried to stab Napoleon. So he took the dagger, 
which he had bought at the same time as the pistol, though it 
was all jagged at the edge, and slipped it inside his waistcoat. 


166 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


He seemed to be eager, not so much to execute his plan as to 
prove to himself that he had not given it up. Then tightening 
his belt, and pulling his cap low over his eyes, he crossed the 
passage, trying to walk noiselessly, and went down into the 
street, without meeting the captain. 

The conflagration, which he had viewed last evening with so 
much indifference, had gained ground rapidly during the night. 
Moscow was burning at several points at once. The Gostinnoi- 
Dvor, the Povarskaia, the boats on the river, the timber-stacks 
by the Dorogomilow Bridge were all in flames. Peter went by 
the Arbat to the church of St. Nicholas; this was the spot which 
he had long since fixed upon for the great deed he was meditating. 
Most of the houses had their windows and doors closed and nailed 
up. The streets and alleys were deserted; the air was full of 
smoke and the smell of burning. From time to time he met a 
few scared and anxious Russians, and Frenchmen of military 
aspect, who took the middle of the street. They all looked 
inquisitively at Peter: his breadth and height, and the set 
expression of pain on his face, puzzled them. The Russians 
stared at him, unable to decide to what rank of life he belonged, 
and the French, accustomed to be themselves an object of 
astonishment or alarm to the natives, also followed him with 
puzzled eyes, for he paid not the slightest attention to them. 
Outside the gate of a large house three French soldiers, who 
were striving ineffectually to make some Russians understand 
them, stopped him to ask him whether he spoke French. He 
shook his head and went on his way. A little farther on, a 
sentinel in charge of a caisson shouted in warning, and it was 
not till he had called out a second time: “Out of the way there!” 
in threatening tones—with the click of the gun he was cocking— 
that Peter understood that he was to go to the other side of the 
street. He had no thought but for his sinister project, and in 
his fear of forgetting it again he saw and understood nothing. 

But his dark resolve was destined to come to nothing; even 
if he had not been stopped on his way, it was now impossible to 
carry it into execution, for the simple reason that Napoleon had 
already been installed for some hours in the imperial palace in 
the Kremlin. At this very moment he was sitting in the czar's 
private room, in a very bad temper, giving orders and taking 
measures for checking the conflagration and pillage, and for 
reassuring the inbabitants. Of this Peter knew nothing; 
absorbed in his one idea, and completely preoccupied, as a man 
always is who is bent on an impossible enterprise, he was 


167 


WAR AND PEACE 


worrying himself, not over the difficulty of carrying it out, 
but over the fatal hesitancy which, at the critical moment, 
would perhaps come upon him, paralyse his action, and deprive 
him for ever of all self-respect. However, on he went instinc- 
tively, without looking before him, and he thus came straight 
to the Povarskaia. The farther he went, the thicker was the 
smoke; he already was aware of the heat of the fire, and tongues 
of flame were dancing up from the neighbouring houses. Here 
the streets were full of an excited crowd. It dawned upon his 
mind that something extraordinary was going forward; but 
still he did not fully understand the state of things. But as 
he followed a beaten footpath across a plot of open ground, 
bordered on one side by the Povarskaia, and on the other by 
the gardens of a large mansion, he suddenly heard, close to him, 
a woman’s cry of despair; he stopped short, as if roused from. 
a dream, and looked up. 

At a short distance on one side all the furniture of a house 
was piled in confusion on the dry and dusty grass-plot; mat- 
tresses, quilts, samovars, and baggage of every description. By 
the side of one of the trunks crouched a young woman, very 
thin and with projecting teeth, wrapped in a black cloak and 
wearing a shabby cap She was wailing and crying bitterly. 
Two little girls of ten and twelve, as thin and as frightened as 
their mother, dressed in wretched little petticoats and cloaks to 
correspond, stared at her in consternation, while a little boy of 
seven, with a cap too big for him, was crying in his old nurse’s 
arms. A maid of all work—as she seemed—barefoot and dirty, 
sitting on one of the cases, had undone her dirty drab plait and 
was pulling out singed hair, while a broad-shouldered man with 
clipped whiskers, and his hair neatly brushed over his temples, 
dressed in the uniform of a humble civil official, was stolidly 
sorting out his clothes from the general muddle. As Peter 
passed close to her the woman threw herself at his feet. 

“Oh! father—good orthodox Christian! Save me and help 
me!" she said between her sobs. “My little girl, my youngest 
baby has been burnt! Oh God! OR God! Was it for this 
that I nursed you and . . .” 

“That will do, that will do, Maria Nicolaievna," said her 
husband coolly; he seemed anxious to make the best of himself 
before this stranger. “Our sister has taken care of her, no 
doubt." 

"Monster! Stony-hearted wretch!” cried the woman, ceasing 
to cry in her rage. “You have not heart even for your own 


168 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


child. Any other man would have snatched her from the 
flames! But he is not a man—not fit to be a father! For 
mercy’s sake," and again she turned to Peter, “listen to me: 
the fire caught our house from the next one; that girl there 
called out: ‘we are on fire’; we flew to save what we could, 
and ran away with what we could carry, and all we could save 
you see there, with that image and our wedding-bed; every- 
thing else is destroyed. Suddenly I discovered that Katia was 
not with us—oh, my child, my child is burnt!" 

“But where did you leave her?" asked Peter, and his sym- 
pathetic face showed the poor woman that in him she had 
found help and comfort. 

* Oh! for God's sake,” she went on, “be my deliverer. Aniska, 
you little slut, show him the way,” and as she spoke she showed 
her long teeth. 

* Come along," said Peter, “I will do all I can." 

The little maid came forth from behind the trunk, put up her 
hair, sighed, and went along the path. Peter, eager for action, 
felt as though he had been roused from some long lethargy; he 
raised his head, his eyes sparkled and he strode along, following 
the girl who led him to the Povarskaia. The houses were 
hidden behind a dense black cloud of smoke, rent now and 
again by shafts of flame. An immense throng stood round, at 
a respectful distance from the blaze, and a French general was 
addressing those nearest to him in the middle of the street. 
Peter, guided by the girl, approached him, but the soldiers 
stopped him. 

“You cannot pass this way." 

“Here, here, little uncle," cried the little maid. “Down the 
side-alley, come." 

Peter turned about, hurrying to catch her up; she turned to 
the left, passed three houses, and went into the gateway of the 
fourth. 

“Tt is here—quite close.” 

She crossed the yard, opened a little door, and paused on the 
threshold, pointing to a small house that was wrapped in flames. 
One wall had already fallen in, the other was still blazing and 
the flames were pouring out at every opening—the windows 
and the roof. Peter involuntarily drew back, suffocated by 
the heat. 

* Which of these houses was yours?” 

“That one, that one,” shrieked the girl. “That is where we 
lived. And are you burnt, my darling treasure, my Katia, my 


169 


WAR AND PEACE 


pet!” cried Aniska, reminded by the sight of the fire that she 
was bound to express some feeling. 

Peter went towards the blazing ruins, but the heat drove him 
back; he retired a short distance and found himself in front of 
a larger house where the roof was as yet only burning on one 
side. Some Frenchmen were prowling about. At first he could 
not imagine what they were doing there; however, he presently 
saw one hit a peasant with the flat of his sword to snatch away 
a pelisse of fox-skin, and then he understood that they were 
plundering; but the idea only passed through his mind. The 
crash of falling walls and ceilings, the roar of the flames, the 
cries of the crowd, the dark twirls of the smoke rent by showers 
of sparks and wreaths of flame which seemed to lick the walls, 
the feeling of suffocation and heat, and the extreme rapidity 
with which he was forced to move, all worked up Peter to that 
intensity of excitement which is the usual concomitant of such 
catastrophes. 

The effect was so sudden and violent as to deliver him at once 
from the ideas that had possessed him. He was young, prompt 
and nimble once more; he went all round the blazing house, 
but, just as he was about to try to enter it, he was startled by a 
shout and the thud of something heavy falling on the ground 
at his feet. He looked up and saw some Frenchmen who had 
just flung out of a window a chest of drawers full of metal 
goods. Their comrades, waiting below, at once gathered 
round it. 

“Well, what does this fellow want?” exclaimed one of them 
angrily. 

“There is a child in the house,” said Peter. “Have none of 
you seen a child?” 

“What is he talking about? Take yourself off!” said several ; 
and one of the soldiers, fearing lest Peter should rob him of 
his share of the plate and bronzes, went up to him with a 
threatening air. 

“A child?" cried a Frenchman from the upper story. “I 
heard something bleating in the garden. That was his brat, 
very likely, poor fellow. We must be humane you know." 

“Where was it? Whereabouts?” asked Peter. 

“Out there,” said the Frenchman, pointing to the garden 
behind the house. “Wait a bit; I will come down.” 

In point of fact, a moment later a Frenchman in his shirt- 
sleeves jumped out of the ground-floor window, slapped Peter 
on the shoulder, and ran with him into the garden, 


170 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


“Look sharp, you fellows,” he cried to his comrades, “it is 
getting uncommonly hot!” and hurrying down the gravel path 
he pulled Peter by the sleeve and showed him a bundle on a 
bench. It was a little girl of three, in a pink cotton frock. 

“There is your brat—a little girl. Well, so that’s all right. 
Good-bye, old boy. We must be humane, we are all mortal 
you see!” and the Frenchman went back to the others. 

Peter, quite out of breath, was about to pick up the child, 
who was as pale and as ugly as her mother, but she gave a 
desperate yell, slipped down, and ran away. Peter soon caught 
the little girl and took her in his arms, while she shrieked with 
rage and tried to fight free with her little hands, biting him 
viciously. Her struggles, reminding him of some small animal, 
revolted him to such an extent that it was only by a great effort 
that he kept himself from dropping the child. On making his 
way back towards the house he perceived that he could no 
longer pass by the way by which he had come. Aniska had 
vanished, and with a mingled feeling of disgust and compassion 
he found himself obliged to cross the garden and find another 
way out, carrying the child, who was still fighting like a little 
demon. 


CHAPTER LV 


Wuen, after various turns through courts and alleys, Peter 
got out with his burthen at the corner of the Povarskaia and 
the Grouzinski garden, he could hardly recognise it; the square, 
usually so deserted, was crowded with people, and piled with 
objects of every description. Not to speak of the Russian 
families who had been driven out with all their possessions, 
there were numbers of French soldiers of various corps. He 
paid no heed to these, but searched anxiously for the child's 
parents, to restore her to them and then be ready, in case of 
need, to effect another rescue. He felt as if there was much 
left for him to do, and that it must be done quickly. Heated 
by the running, he felt more than ever that same feeling of youth 
and resolution which had come over him when he went off to 
save the child. The little girl, who by degrees had quieted 
down, clung to his caftan, and crouching close to him like a 
little scared animal, looked about her in alarm, while Peter 
smiled down at her quite paternally. He felt interested by 
the pale sickly little face; but he sought in vain in the crowd 


171 


WAR AND PEACE 


that surrounded him—he could see neither the functionary nor 
his wife. 

At this moment his eye was attracted by a family of Armenians 
or Georgians, consisting of an old man of the noblest eastern 
type, tall and splendidly dressed, a matron of the same race, 
and a quite young woman whose finely-arched eyebrows, as 
black as a crow’s wing, ivory skin, and calm, regular features 
gave distinction to her remarkable beauty. She was sitting on 
a bale of goods behind the older woman, surrounded by piles 
of their belongings; and in her rich wrapper of satin, with a 
violet kerchief on her head, and her large almond-shaped eyes 
whose silky lashes were persistently downcast, she looked like 
some delicate exotic plant flung out among the snows: she 
evidently knew that she was beautiful and her beauty gave her 
alarms. Peter gazed at her again and again. At length he 
reached the railings and looked round to get a general view of 
the scene; his strange appearance, carrying the child in his 
arms, soon attracted the attention of his neighbours, who 
gathered round him, asking him: 

“Have you lost anyone?” “Are you a gentleman?” 
“Whose is the child?” 

Peter replied that the child belonged to a woman whom he 
had seen on this very spot a short time since, who wore a black 
cloak and had three children with her. 

“Could no one tell him which way she had gone?" 

“Tt must be the Anférows," said an old deacon, addressing 
a woman who stood by. “Lord, Lord, have mercy upon us!" 
he murmured in a low bass. 

“Where are the Anférows?” said the woman. 

"They went away quite early in the day. Perhaps it was 
Maria Nicolaievna—or perhaps the Ivanows." 

“A woman, he said; Maria Nicolaievna is a lady,” said a voice. 

"You must surely know her," said Peter; *a thin woman 
with long teeth." 

“Yes, then it is Maria Nicolaievna They ran away into the 
garden when these wolves came down on us!" 

“Lord, Lord, have mercy upon us!" repeated the deacon. 

"If you go that way you are sure to find her. She was 
crying, crying. Go on, you will find them." 

But Peter had ceased to listen to the peasant woman who was 
speaking to him; he was wholly absorbed by a scene that was 
being enacted by two French soldiers with the Armenian family. 
One of them, a brisk little man in a dark-blue greatcoat fastened 


172 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


round his waist with a cord, and a foraging-cap on his head, 
had seized the old man by the legs, and his victim was making 
haste to take his boots off. The other, who was fair, lean and 
long, and very deliberate in his movements, had a stupid face; 
his garments were a pair of blue trousers stuffed into high boots, 
and a greatcoat; he stood rooted in front of the young woman, 
with his hands in his pockets, staring at her, speechless. 

* Here, take the child and find her parents! Do you under- 
stand?” said Peter to one of the women; he set the child down 
and turned to the Armenians. 

The old man was now barefoot, and the little Frenchman 
who had appropriated his boots was shaking them together, 
while the hapless owner murmured a few words with a piteous 
air. But Peter only glanced at him; his attention was centred 
on the other Frenchman, who had come close to the lady and 
had put his hand round her neck. The fair Armenian did not 
move. Peter had not time to rush forward before the robber 
had snatched off her necklace, and the young woman, roused 
from her absorption, was screaming wildly. 

“Let this woman alone!” cried Peter, shaking the man by 
the shoulders; he dropped it and then springing loose fled as 
fast as his legs would carry him. 

His companion threw down the boots, drew his sword and 
marched up to Peter. “Come, no nonsense!” he said. 

Peter, flying into one of those fits of fury which multiplied 
his strength tenfold and made him unconscious of what he 
was doing, threw himself on the man, tripped him up, and 
then belaboured him with his fists. The crowd shouted their 
applause, when, round the corner of the square, a patrol of 
lancers appeared on the scene; they came forward at a trot, 
and gathered round the victor and the vanquished. Peter 
knew only one thing, and that was that he was punishing his 
victim harder than ever and being beaten in his turn; then he 
presently found his hands tied, while a party of soldiers were 
emptying his pockets. 

“He has a dagger, captain!” These were the first words he 
distinctly understood. 

* Ah!a weapon!” said the officer. “Very good; you will report 
all that to the council of war. Do you speak French—you?” 

Peter, glaring with bloodshot eyes, made no answer, and his 
appearance was not probably such as to inspire confidence, for 
the officer gave an order in an undertone, and four lancers took 


him in charge. 
173 


WAR AND PEACE 


“Do you speak French?” repeated the officer, standing at a 
respectful distance. “Call the interpreter." 

A little man in civilian’s uniform came from behind the 
ranks, and Peter recognised him as a French counter-jumper 
whom he had known in a shop in Moscow. 

"He does not look like a common man,” said the 
interpreter, eyeing Peter narrowly. 

“One of the incendiaries, no doubt,” said the officer. “Ask 
him who he is.” 

“Who are you?” said the interpreter. “It is your duty to 
reply to the authorities.” 

"I will not give my name," Peter broke out in French. “I 
am your prisoner; lead me away." 

“Ah, ha!” cried the officer, frowning. “March!” 

A party of starers, including the woman with the child he 
had entrusted to her, had gathered round the group. 

“Where are they taking you to? And what am I to do with 
the child if it is not theirs, after all?" 

“What does the woman want?" asked the officer. 

Peter's excitement at seeing the child he had rescued quite 
turned his head: “What does she want? She has got my 
child there, that I had just saved from the flames!” And 
without knowing in the least what had possessed him to tell 
this aimless lie, he walked on between the four lancers told 
off to guard him. 

This patrol, and several others, had been sent out by Duros- 
nel's orders to check pillage and to capture the incendiaries 
who, as the French leaders believed, were setting fire to Moscow. 
But the only persons on whom suspicion had fallen were a 
shopman, two students, a peasant, a manservant, and a few 
marauders. Peter was the most unaccountable character they 
had yet seized, and when the prisoners were taken to the house 
used as a guard-house, he was placed in a separate room under 
strict surveillance. 


174 


BOOK THIRTEEN 


CHAPTER LVI 


At this period a vehement struggle, in which all the drones of 
the court, as usual, took part, was being fought in the fashionable 
world of St. Petersburg between the Roumiantzow party, the 
friends of France and the adherents of the empress dowager and 
the czarewitch; although the ordinary round of luxurious living 
went on as before. For those who lived within the influence of 
this whirlpool of rivalry and competition of every kind, it was 
difficult, if not impossible, to form any true idea of the critical 
position of Russia; here were only the regular official cere- 
monials, the same balls and French plays, the same sordid 
interests and court jealousies; only in the very highest circles 
attempts were made to show the real difficulties of the existing 
position. Now and again, at most, were a few comments 
breathed as to the different conduct of the two empresses under 
these grave circumstances. While the empress-mother, thinking 
only of protecting the different institutions of which she was 
patroness, had already taken all the necessary steps for their 
transfer to Kazan, and had had all their possessions packed for 
removal, the Empress Elizabeth, with her wonted patriotism, 
had answered to various applications from all sides that as the 
institutions of the government were in the czar’s hands she had 
no instructions to give on the subject; but that for her part 
she should be the last to quit St. Petersburg. 

On the day of the battle of Borodino Miss Schérer was giving 
one of her little soirées, of which the crowning feature was to be 
the reading of a letter written to the czar by the metropolitan 
and sent with a gift of an image of St. Sergius. This letter was 
reported to be a supreme expression of patriotic and religious 
sentiment. Prince Basil, who flattered himself that he was a 
very remarkable reader—he had occasionally read aloud to the 
empress—was to give it the advantage of his talent. This con- 
sisted in raising and lowering his voice and passing from solemn 
to sweet without any regard for the sense of the words. 


175 


WAR AND PEACE 


This reading, moreover, like everything that was done at 
Anna Paulovna’s, was full of political significance; some in- 
fluential personages were to meet there, and were to be made 
to blush for shame because they continued to frequent the 
French theatre. Miss Schérer’s room was already full, but she 
did not yet see those whose presence she deemed necessary 
before that letter could be read. 

The latest subject of conversation was the illness of Countess 
Bésoukhow, who, for some time past, had ceased to be visible 
in the assemblies of which she was wont to be the ornament, 
who received no visits, and who, instead of putting herself 
under the care of a physician of repute, had placed herseit in 
the hands of an Italian doctor; this Italian was treating her 
with a perfectly new and unknown remedy. Everyone knew 
that the handsome countess’s disorder arose from vexation 
at her inability to marry two husbands at once; but in Anna 
Paulovna’s presence no one alluded even to this delicate dilemma. 

“The poor countess is very ill, I hear; the doctor talks of 
angina.” 

“Of angina! but that is a fearful thing!” 

“They say that, thanks to this angina, the rivals are recon- 
ciled. The old count is quite pathetic, it seems; he cried like 
a child when the doctor told him that it was a serious case.” 

“Oh! she will be a dreadful loss—such a charming woman.” 

“You are speaking of the poor countess? I have just sent 
to inquire after her. They say she is a little better. Oh yes, 
she is the most delightful creature in the world,” replied Anna 
Paulovna, smiling at her own enthusiasm. “We belong to 
different parties, but that does not prevent my esteeming her 
as she deserves. And she is so unfortunate!” 

An imprudent youth, fancying that this remark raised a 
corner of the veil that shrouded the countess’s secret woes, was 
so bold as to observe that the Italian quack was quite capable 
of administering dangerous remedies to his patient. 

“You may, of course, be better informed than I am,” said 
Miss Schérer, taking the young man up very tartly, “but I 
have heard, on the best authority, that this physician is a 
very learned and skilful man. He is a private physician to 
the Queen of Spain!” 

Having thus demolished him, she turned to Bilibine, who 
was about to deliver himself of a witticism at the expense of 
the Austrians. 

“It strikes me as really delightful!" he exclaimed, speaking 


176 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


of a certain diplomatic note which had accompanied some 
Austrian flags that had been taken by Wittgenstein—the hero 
of Petropolis, as he was called at St. Petersburg. 

* What is that?" asked Anna Paulovna, to produce a silence, 
and so enable him to repeat the sarcasm, which she had already 
heard. 

He hastened to take advantage of it, and quoted the very 
words of the despatch, which he had, in fact, concocted himself: 
“The czar begs to return these Austrian colours—the flags of 
a friend which had lost their way when he found them.” 

* Charming, quite charming!” exclaimed Prince Basil. 

“On the road to Warsaw, perhaps," said Prince Hippolyte, 
quite loud; and everyone looked round at him, for the words 
were pure nonsense. 

He responded to the general surprise with a look of amiable 
complacency. He did not know what he meant any more than 
the others did; but in the course of his diplomatic career he had 
observed that phrases uttered in this style sometimes passed 
for wit; he had spoken at random, the first words that came 
to the tip of his tongue, thinking to himself: “Hit or miss. 
It may be something good; even if not, someone is sure to 
take the benefit of it!” 

The awkward silence that ensued was broken by the entrance 
of the personage “who was deficient in patriotism,” and whom 
Anna Paulovna proposed to convert toa better mind. Threaten- 
ing Prince Hippolyte roguishly with her forefinger, she begged 
Prince Basil to come to the table, had candles placed ir front of 
him, and handing him the letter, requested him to read it aloud. 

* Most august sovereign and czar," Prince Basil began in a 
solemn tone, and with a glance at the company which seemed 
to pronounce judgment by anticipation on anyone who should 
dare to raise his voice against this beginning. No one breathed 
a word. ‘Moscow, the New Jerusalem, receives her anointed,” 
he went on, emphasising the pronoun, “as a mother embracing 
in her arms ker ardent sons; and, foreseeing the dazzling glory 
of your power through the growing darkness, she sings with 
rapture: ‘Hosanna! Blessed is He that cometh!’” There were 
tears in Prince Basil’s voice as he read these words. 

Bilibine sat looking at his nails; others looked somewhat 
embarrassed. Anna Paulovna, taking the lead, murmured in 
an undertone the next sentence, which she knew by heart: 
“What matter if this insolent and daring Goliath . . ." while 
Prince Basil went on reading: 


NY 


WAR AND PEACE 


“What matter if this insolent and daring Goliath, coming 
from the frontiers of France, should bring his murderous terrors 
to the confines of Russia; humble faith—the sling of the Russian 
David—shall strike the forehead of his pride thirsting for blood. 
This image of the Blessed Saint Sergius, the ancient zealot of 
his country’s good, is hereby offered to your imperial majesty. 
I regret that the infirmities of age prevent my rejoicing in 
the sight of your majesty. I offer my most fervent prayers to 
the Almighty that He may vouchsafe to add to the number of 
the righteous, and fulfil your majesty’s pious hopes!” 

“What power! what style!” cried one and another, praising 
the author and reader alike. 

Anna Paulovna’s guests, fairly startled by the eloquence of 
this epistle, remained for a long time after discussing the posi- 
tion of the empire, and indulging in every variety of supposition- 
as to the issue of the battle which must certainly be fought 
about this date. 

" You will see," said Miss Schérer, *to-morrow is the czar's 
birthday, and we shall have some news; good news—I have a 
happy presentiment!” 


CHAPTER LVII 


HER presentiments were realised. The next day, while the 
Te Deum was being chanted at the palace, Prince Volkonsky 
was called out of the chapel, and received a despatch contain- 
ing Koutouzow's report, written on the day of the battle from 
Tatarinovo. The Russians, he said, had not yielded an inch $ 
the enemy’s losses were greater than theirs; but he was writing 
hurriedly from the field of battle and had not as yet been able 
to collect the latest information. Consequently this must have 
been a victory. Then the Te Deum was sung all over again 
as an act of thanksgiving to the Almighty for His mercy shown 
to his faithful servants. Anna Paulovna was triumphant, and 
the joys of a high festival were paramount for the whole morning. 
Everyone believed in a complete victory; several even talked of 
the possibility of Napoleon’s being taken prisoner, of overthrow- 
ing him, and placing a new sovereign on the throne of France. 

Remote from the scene, and in the midst of court life, it was 
difficult to estimate the real importance of events as they 
occurred, for under such conditions they inevitably group them- 


178 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


selves round some personal fact. Thus, in this case, the joy of 
the court at the announcement of the victory chiefly arose from 
the fact that the news had arrived on the czar’s birthday; it 
was like a pleasant surprise successfully carried out. 

Koutouzow also mentioned the losses sustained; naming 
among the killed Koutaissow, Toutchkow, and Bagration; but 
regret again was concentrated on one alone: Koutaissow, an 
interesting young officer, known to everyone, and a particular 
favourite with the czar. All day the changes were rung on 
these phrases: “Is not it strange that the news should have 
come just during the Te Deum? That poor young Koutaissow! 
What a loss! What a sad thing!" 

“Well, what did I tell you about Koutouzow?” Prince Basil 
would repeat to all comers, wrapping himself, as it were, in the 
prophet's mantle. "Did I not tell you from the first, that 
he was the only man who could beat Napoleon?" 

The following day passed without any news from the army, 
and the public mind began to be uneasy. The court was much 
hurt at the ignorance in which the czar was kept: “His position 
is most painful," they said; and Koutouzow was already held 
guilty of causing him all this anxiety, though only yesterday 
they had lauded him to the skies. Prince Basil had ceased to 
trumpet the praises of his protégé, and kept ominous silence 
when the commander-in-chief was mentioned. 

That evening a fresh sensational incident added to the excite- 
ment which prevailed in aristocratic circles: Countess Helen 
died suddenly of her mysterious disorder. It was officially 
reported that it was the result of her angina, but privately 
further details were discussed: the Queen of Spain's physician 
had prescribed some remedy which, in small doses, would have 
had a favourable effect; but Helen, tormented by the old count's 
jealousy, and the silence of her husband—that dreadful Peter! 
had taken a double dose of the medicine, and died in fearful 
suffering before any antidote could be administered. It was 
said, too, that Prince Basil and the count had taken the Italian 
doctor severely to task, but that on reading certain autograph 
letters of the deceased lady's which the physician had been able 
to lay before them, they had given up the idea of prosecuting 
him. Be that as it may, drawing-room gossips had enough to 
occupy them that day with three such distressing themes: the 
czar's uneasiness, the loss of Koutaissow, and Helen's death. 

On the day but one after the arrival of the great news, a 
landed proprietor from Moscow brought the incredible and 


WO 


WAR AND PEACE 


astounding story that the old capital had been abandoned 
to the French. “How shocking! The czar’s position was 
intolerable! Koutouzow was a traitor!” And Prince Basil 
assured those who came to condole with him on the death of 
his daughter, that nothing better was to be expected of this 
blind and impotent old man: “For my part," he added, for- 
getting, no doubt, in his grief, what he had said the day before, 
"I always was amazed to think that the fate of Russia should 
be entrusted to such hands!" 

The news was not official, to be sure, and doubt was still 
admissible: but on the morrow the fact was confirmed by the 
following report from Count Rostopchine: 

“Prince Koutouzow's aide-de-camp has brought me a letter 
in which the commander-in-chief requests me to furnish him- 
with a force of police to guide the troops across the city to the 
high road to Riazan. He affects regret at being obliged to 
abandon Moscow. Sire, this act decides the fate of the capital, 
and of your empire. Russia will thrill with indignation on 
learning that the city which represents the greatness of Russia, 
and which enshrines the ashes of your ancestry, is in the hands 
of the enemy. I am following the army, and have sent away 
all that it was necessary to save." 


The czar sent for Prince Volkonsky and dictated the following 
note to Koutouzow: 


“Prince Michael Ilarionovitch, I have no news of you later 
than the 29th of August (roth of September). I have just 
received via Yaroslaw, under date of September rst (13th), the 
painful news that you have abandoned our capital. You may 
imagine the effect it produced on me, and your silence adds to 
my amazement. General aide-de-camp Prince Volkonsky is 
the bearer of this note, and is instructed to take information 
as to the situation of the army, and the reasons which have 
led you to such an extreme course." 


180 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


CHAPTER LVIII 


NINE days after the abandonment of Moscow a messenger 
arrived from Koutouzow with official confirmation of the fact. 
This envoy was a Frenchman named Michaud—“though a 
foreigner, in heart and soul a Russian,” as he himself declared. 
The czar received him at once, in his private room at the palace 
in Kamennoi-Ostrow. Michaud, who had just seen Moscow 
for the first time in his life, and who did not know Russian, 
nevertheless felt greatly agitated, as he subsequently recorded, 
when he appeared before our very gracious sovereign to announce 
to him the burning of Moscow, which had lighted up his road. 
Though his grief may have had a different cause than that 
which weighed on the Russians, he looked so deeply distressed 
that the czar at once said: “You are the bearer of bad news, 
colonel.” 

“Very bad, sire!” he said, sighing and looking down: “The 
evacuation of Moscow.” 

“Has my ancient capital been given up without a struggle?” 
And the angry colour mounted to the czar’s brow. 

Michaud respectfully delivered Koutouzow’s message: “Seeing 
the impossibility of fighting under the walls of Moscow, there 
was only the alternative of losing the capital and the army both, 
or of losing the capital only; and he had been compelled to 
submit to the latter." 

The emperor listened in silence without raising his eyes. 

* And the enemy is in the city?" he asked. 

“Yes, sire. And by this time Moscow is probably a heap of 
ashes, for I left it in flames." 

Michaud was appalled at the effect of his words. The 
emperor’s breathing became oppressed and painful, his lips 
quivered, and his fine blue eyes filled with tears, but this was 
a transient emotion; the czar frowned, seeming vexed with 
himself for his weakness. 

“I see,” he said, “from all that is happening, that Providence 
still requires great sacrifices at our hand. I am prepared to 
submit to His will. But tell me, Michaud, in what state you 
left the army which could thus look on without striking a blow 
while my ancient capital was abandoned? Did you see no signs 
of discouragement?” 

Seeing that his gracious majesty was calm, Michaud, too, 
recovered himself; but not being prepared with any exact 
information, he answered, in order to gain time: 


181 


WAR AND PEACE 


"Have I your majesty's permission to speak frankly, as a 
plain, honest soldier? 

“Colonel, that is what I always insist on. Conceal nothing; 
I want to know the exact truth." 

"Sire," said Michaud, with the faintest suggestion of a smile, 
for he had had time to formulate his answer in the guise of a 
respectful jest, "sire, I left the army, from the chiefs to the 
lowest recruit, in a state of extreme and desperate alarm." 

“How is that?” asked the czar, sternly. “Are my Russians 
cowed and crushed by disaster? Never!” 

Michaud had made his point. ‘“‘Sire,” he went on with due 
submission, ‘‘their only fear is lest, out of the goodness of your 
heart, you should be induced to make peace. They are burning 
to fight, and to prove to your majesty by the sacrifice of their 
lives how complete is their devotion!” 

"Ah!" said the czar, with a grateful look. “You have 
relieved my mind, colonel.” 

He bent his head and remained silent. 

“Well then,” he went on presently, drawing himself up to 
his full height with majestic dignity, “go back to the army. 
Tell our brave men—tell all my loyal subjects wherever you go 
—that when I have no soldiers left I myself will lead forth my 
beloved nobles, my gallant peasantry, and so fall back even on 
the last resources of my empire. I have many more at my com- 
mand than my enemies suspect,” he added, warming as he 
spoke. “Still, if it be written in the decrees of Providence,” 
and he looked up to Heaven with a softened gaze—''that my 
dynasty is to cease to sit on the throne of my ancestors, then, 
after exhausting every means in my power, I will let my beard 
grow and sit down to eat potatoes with the humblest of my 
subjects rather than sign the disgrace of my country and 
of my beloved countrymen, whose sacrifices I can so well 
appreciate!” 

He spoke with strong emotion, and turned away as though 
to hide his tears. After walking to the end of the room and 
back he eagerly came up to Michaud and wrung his hand, 
saying, while his eyes flashed with wrath and determination: 
“Colonel Michaud, do not forget what I have said to you now; 
some day, perhaps, we may recall it with pleasure. Napoleon 
and I can no longer reign together; I know him now, and he 
will not deceive me again!” 

Hearing these words, and seeing the resolute expression which 
was legible on the sovereign’s face, Michaud—“ though a 


182 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


foreigner, in heart and soul a Russian”—felt himself carried 
away by genuine enthusiasm, as he subsequently recorded. 

“Sire,” he exclaimed, “your majesty at this moment seals 
the glory of your empire and the salvation of Europe!” 

When he had thus given utterance, not merely to his personal 
feelings, but to those of the Russian nation, whose representative 
at that moment he considered himself, the czar dismissed him 
with a bow. 


CHAPTER LIX 


Waen Russia, already half-conquered, saw the inhabitants of 
Moscow flying to distant provinces, while the levies of militia 
went on without cessation, we—who did not live then—we 
fancy that every individual, from the greatest to the least, 
can have had but one idea: that, namely, of sacrificing every- 
thing to save the country, or to perish with it. The records of 
the time, indeed, are full of traits of devotion and love, of despair 
and anguish, but the reality was far from what we fancy it. 
The historic interest of those terrible years diverts our attention 
from the minor personal interests which, by their more immediate 
pressure, blinded contemporary witnesses to the importance of 
all that was going on around them. The individuals then 
living, of whom the great majority were guided by these narrow 
considerations, were, by that very fact, the most useful agents 
of their time; while those who endeavoured on the contrary 
to comprehend the general progress of affairs, and to play their 
part in them by acts of heroism and self-sacrifice, were the most 
useless members of society. They looked at everything from 
the wrong point of view, and what they did with the best 
intentions was, after all, mere aimless folly; for example, the 
regiments formed by Peter, and by Mamonow, spent all their 
time in robbing villages; and, again, the lint prepared by the 
ladies never reached the wounded for whom it was made. 
The speeches of those men who never ceased talking of the 
situation of the country unconsciously bore the stamp either of 
false judgment, or of blame and of animosity against men whom 
they accused of faults for which no one was really responsible. 
Those who write history learn the wisdom of the prohibition 
to touch the tree of knowledge; unconscious agency alone can 
bring forth fruit. He who plays a part in events is the last to 


183 


WAR AND PEACE 


know their real importance; and the moment he tries to seize 
their purport, and to take a conscious part in them, his actions 
are barren of result. At St. Petersburg, as well as in the 
interior governments, all, from the militia to the ladies, bewailed 
the fate of Russia, and of the capital, and talked of nothing but 
sacrifice and devotion; the army, withdrawn beyond Moscow, 
thought nothing of what it was abandoning nor of the conflagra- 
tion it had left behind—still less of vengeance on the French; 
it thought of the next quarter’s pay, the next halting-stage, of 
Matrechka, the vivandiére, and so forth. 

Nicholas Rostow, who was still in the service when the war 
began, consequently played a real and active part in the defence 
of the country; but he had no preconceived plan, and he gave 
himself up to no solemn reflections. If he had been asked his 
opinion as to the state of the country, he would have answered 
plainly that it was no concern of his; that Koutouzow and the 
others were there to think for him; all he knew was this: “the 
regiments were being steadily recruited , there would be fighting 
tor a long while to come, and under existing circumstances it 
was very likely that he would be promoted to command a 
regiment." Thanks to this view of the question, he did not 
even regret his absence from the last battle, and he had gladly 
accepted a commission to go to Voronége to buy horses for 
the division. 

Thus, only a few days before Borodino, Nicholas had received 
the needful instructions and money, had sent the hussars in 
advance, had taken post-horses and set out. 

Only those who have spent several months in the atmosphere 
of a camp during a campaign can form any idea of the gladness 
that Nicholas felt as he got beyond the radius pervaded by 
baggage-trains, hospitals, and forage and victualling stores. 
When he was fairly out of the camp, and the influence of the 
inelegant details of everyday camp life; when he found himself 
among villages, peasants, country houses, fields, herds pasturing 
at their will, post-houses with their sleepy masters—he felt such 
an exuberance of joy that he could have fancied he saw it all 
for the first time. Above all what took his fancy were the 
young, wholesome-looking women that he met, without the 
usual train of half a score of officers paying court to them, but 
flattered and smiling at the civilities of the travelling hussar. 
Enchanted alike with himself and his fate, he reached Voronége 
at night, put up at the inn, and crdered everything he had been 
forced to do without in camp. Next morning, after shaving 


184 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


with particular care, and putting on his full-dress uniform— 
which had not seen the light for many a day—he sallied forth 
to pay his respects to the authorities. 

The commandant of militia, a middle-aged civilian, promoted 
to rank as a general, was quite enchanted with his uniform and 
new functions. He received Nicholas with a sternly important 
air, which he believed to be the right thing for a real soldier, 
and questioned him with alternate approval or disapproval, as 
if he had the right of judgment. As Nicholas was in the best 
possible humour, this only amused him, and not for a moment 
did he think of taking offence. He next called on the governor, 
a brisk, busy little man, fat and friendly, who told him of a 
stud-farm where he could buy good horses, recommended a 
horse-dealer, and mentioned a landowner, whose estate lay 
about twenty versts out of the town, and who also had some 
capital beasts for sale, promising him every assistance. 

“Vou are Count Ilia Andréiévitch’s son?” he added. “My 
wife is a great friend of your mother’s. We see our friends 
every Thursday evening—to-day is Thursday; let us have the 
pleasure of seeing you this evening. Quite without ceremony.” 

On leaving the governor, Nicholas took horses and set off 
with his quartermaster to visit the stud-farm of which he had 
been told. The owner was an old bachelor, a retired cavalry 
officer, a great connoisseur of horses, a furious hunter, and the 
owner of some brandy, a century old, besides some fine old 
Hungarian wine. Nicholas soon came to terms with him, 
acquiring seventeen stallions of the best breed to supply the 
future requirements of the regiment, for which he was to pay 
6000 roubles. Then, after a good dinner, doing ample justice 
to the old Hungarian, and taking a cordial leave of his host 
with whom he was immediately on the most intimate terms, 
he made his way back by the same road, as jovially as he had 
come—rating the coachman to hurry him up, for fear of missing 
the party. 

After sluicing himself from head to foot in a cold bath, in 
clean clothes, brushed and scented, he made his appearance, 
though rather late, at the governor’s house. It was not a ball, 
but as it was known that Catherina Pétrovna could play waltzes 
and country-dances, and there would be dancing, the ladies had 
preferred to come in low dresses. Life went on just as usual 
in Voronége in 1812; the only difference was that there was 
unwonted stir in the provincial town. Several wealthy families 
from Moscow had taken refuge there under pressure of 


185 


WAR AND PEACE 


circumstances, and instead of the usual commonplace gossip 
about the weather, and their neighbours, they discussed what 
was going on at Moscow, the war, and Napoleon. 

The governor's soirée consisted of the cream of local society, 
including several ladies whom Nicholas had known at Moscow; 
and of the men there was not one to compare with this brilliant 
Knight of St. George, the young hussar, the handsome and 
agreeable Count Nicholas Rostow. Among the guests was an 
Italian, a prisoner from the French army, and Nicholas felt 
that his presence there—a living trophy, as it were—added 
lustre to his own splendour as a hero. In this simple conviction 
that everyone must share this sentiment he was cordially polite 
to the Italian, with an infusion of dignified reserve. 

The moment he entered the room in his hussar’s uniform, - 
diffusing odours of scent and wine, he was surrounded by an 
admiring circle, and “Better late than never!” was the word 
on all sides. As the centre of attraction he felt quite in his 
element, finding himself once more, to his great satisfaction, in 
the position of which he had so long been deprived as society’s 
favourite. The ladies, married and single, aimed all their 
coquettish arts at him, and the dowagers at once laid plots 
for providing him with a wife—to put an end, as they said, to 
this dashing young officer’s follies. The governor’s wife, who 
received him as a near relation, and already was on familiar 
terms, was among these. Catherine Pétrovna played her tunes; 
the dancing became lively, giving Nicholas an opportunity of 
displaying all his graces. His elegant agility charmed the 
women, and he himself even was surprised to find himself 
dancing so well; at Moscow he would never have allowed him- 
self such daring freedom, bordering, it must be owned, on bad 
style; but here he felt impelled to astonish his public by some- 
thing extraordinary, a revelation to these provincial souls, and 
to compel them to accept it as the last fashion from the capital. 

He selected as the particular object of his attentions a pretty, 
fair, blue-eyed young woman, the wife of a government official. 
In the simple conviction which all young men enjoy when their 
one object is pleasure, that other men’s wives were created for 
them, he never left his conquest for an instant: he even carried 
his diplomacy so far as to make up to the lady’s husband, as 
though they already foresaw that they could not fail to come 
to an understanding though they had not as yet confessed their 
feelings. The husband seemed to have no mind to lend himself 
to these manceuvres and met the hussar’s advances with marked 


186 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


coldness; still, the young fellow’s frank good humour and 
engaging high spirits more than once thawed his rigidity 
Towards the end of the evening, however, in proportion as the 
wife’s face flushed and grew eager, the husband’s became 
darker; it was as though they had only a certain modicum 
of vivacity between them, and when it rose in the wife it fell 
in the husband. 


CHAPTER LX 


NICHOLAS, stretched in an arm-chair, was amusing himself by 
putting himself into attitudes to show off his neat little feet in 
their irreproachable boots; and all the while he never ceased 
laughing and paying inflated compliments to the pretty blonde, 
confiding to her, as a great secret, that he fully meant to run 
away with one of the ladies of Voronége. 

* Which is it?” she asked. 

“Oh! a charming creature—lovely, divine! Her eyes," he 
went on, looking at his neighbour, “are blue, her lips are coral, 
her shoulders as white!—Her form Diana’s own!” 

At this moment the husband came up and asked his wife in 
gloomy tones of what they were talking. 

“Ah! Nikita Ivanitch . . ." Rostow exclaimed, rising 
politely; then, as if to invite him to share the joke, he told 
him that he intended to carry off a certain lady, fair and blue- 
eyed. The gentleman received the communication very coldly; 
the lady was beaming. The governor's wife, who was an 
excellent kind woman, came forward with a half-stern, half- 
smiling face. 

* Anna Ignatievna would like to speak to you, Nicholas." 
And she pronounced the name in such a way as to make him 
understand that the lady was a person of importance. ‘‘Come 
—come with me." 

* Immediately, aunt; but who is she?" 

*Mrs. Malvintzew. She had heard of you from her niece 
whom you rescued. . . . Can you guess who?” 

* But I rescued so many!” said Nicholas. 

* Well, her niece is Princess Bolkonsky; she is here with her 
aunt. Dear me! how you blush; what is the meaning of that?" 

“Not at all—I assure you. . . ." 

*Oh! Very well, mystery-monger!" And she introduced 


187 


WAR AND PEACE 


him to an old lady, very tall and stout, with a blue turban on 
her head, who had just risen from her game at boston with 
the magnates of the town. 

This was Mrs. Malvintzew, Princess Maria’s aunt on her 
mother’s side, a rich and childless widow, who never stirred out 
of Voronége. She was standing up and paying her losses when 
Nicholas made his bow. Looking at him from her lofty height 
and knitting her brows, she went on scolding the general who 
had won her money. 

"Charmed, my dear boy," she said, holding out her hand. 
* Come and see me." 

After a few words relating to Princess Maria and her late 
father, who had never been in her good graces, she asked for 
news of Prince Andrew, who was no favourite of hers, either. 
At last she dismissed him, renewing her invitation to call. ~ 
Nicholas promised to do so and coloured as he left her, for 
Princess Maria’s name roused an incomprehensible emotion of 
shyness and even of alarm. 

He was going back to the dancing-room when he was stopped 
by a fat little hand on his arm; the governor’s wife had a few 
words to say to him, and she carried him off into a little room, 
which her other guests very soon discreetly evacuated. 

“Do you know, my dear,” she began, and her friendly little 
face assumed a grave expression. “I have found a wife for you. 
Shall I arrange a match?” 

“With whom, aunt?” 

“Princess Maria. Catherina Pétrovna thought of Lili; but I 
am for the princess. Do you like it? I am sure your mother 
will thank me. She is a charming girl, and by no means so 
ugly as people say.” 

“She is not ugly at all,” cried Nicholas, in an injured tone. 
“As for myself—my Ways are a soldier's ways; I force myself 
on no one and I refuse nothing," he went on, without pausing 
to consider his reply. 

“Then you must remember that it is not a mere jest, and I 
must say, my dear boy, that you are too attentive to the other 
lady; her husband is really pitiable to see.” 

" What an idea! We are very good friends!” said Nicholas, 
who, in his frank simplicity could not imagine that his pleasant 
pastime could give anyone umbrage. “I answered the governor's 
wife like a fool," said he to himself at supper. "Now she will 
be making up a match for me—and Sonia?” 

So, when he was bidding her good-night, and she reminded 


188 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


him of their compact, with a smile, he drew her aside and said: 
“I ought to tell you, aunt, that...” 

“Come in here, my dear boy, sit down....” And he 
suddenly felt an irresistible impulse to confide in this woman 
who was almost a stranger to him, and to tell her his most 
secret thoughts—thoughts which he would not have told his 
mother even, or his sister, or his most intimate friend. When 
he afterwards remembered this inexplicable explosion of can- 
dour, for which there was no adequate motive and which led 
to serious issues, he could only ascribe it to chance. 

“This is how matters stand. For a long time mamma has 
been bent on marrying me to an heiress; but a marriage for 
money is to me supremely objectionable.” 

“That I quite understand,” said the good lady. 

“But this is a very different thing. I may honestly confess 
to you that Princess Bolkonsky attracts me extremely: she 
would suit me perfectly; and since I met her under such painful 
circumstances I have often thought it was the hand of fate. 
Besides, I daresay you know that my mother has always longed 
for this marriage, only, I don’t know how it was, but we never 
had happened to meet. Then, when my sister Natacha was 
engaged to her brother, it was impossible that I should think 
of itt Now, I have met her again just as that match is broken 
off, and other circumstances.... In fact, the long and short 
of the matter—I never spoke of it to anyone till this moment, 
and it is between ourselves. . . ." The lady listened with added 
interest. “You know my cousin Sonia? I love her, and I 
have promised to marry her, and I mean to marry her. So you 
see, the other is out of the question...” he added, hesitating 
and blushing. 

* My dear, my dear boy, how can you talk so? Sonia has 
nothing, and you yourself told me that your affairs were all in 
confusion. As to your mother—it would kill her; and Sonia 
herself, if she has any good feeling, would certainly not accept 
such a life: a mother in despair, a fortune gone to ruin! No, 
my dear, you and Sonia both must understand that.” 

Nicholas was silent, but the inference was not wholly 
unpleasing. 

“But it is impossible, aunt, nevertheless,” he said with a 
sigh. “Would Princess Maria have anything to say to me? 
Besides, she is mourning; it is not to be thought of.” 


1In the Greek Church connection by marriage is regarded as blood 
relationship—for instance, two brothers cannot marry two sisters. 


189 


WAR AND PEACE 


“Do you suppose I am going to take you by the throat, 
on the spot, and marry you out of hand? There are ways 
and means.” 

“Oh! what a match-maker you are!” said Nicholas, kissing 
her plump little hand. 


CHAPTER LXI 


ON her return to Moscow Princess Maria had found her nephew 
there, with his tutor; also a letter from Prince Andrew, who 
implored her to go on as far as Voronége and stay there with 
her aunt, Mrs. Malvintzew. The worry of moving, the anxiety 
about her brother, the arrangement of a new life in a new home- 
among strange faces, and the education of the little boy—all 
for a time smothered the temptations which had tormented 
the poor girls soul during her father's illness and after his 
death, and more especially after her meeting with Rostow. 
She was sad and anxious; the grief she felt for her father's 
death was aggravated by her sorrow for the disasters of the 
country ; in spite of a whole month spent in peace and monotony, 
these painful emotions seemed to increase in intensity. The 
danger which her brother—her only near relation—must con- 
stantly run was always in her mind; and added to this was the 
care of her nephew's education, a task to which she felt herself 
quite unequal. But nevertheless she was calm of soul because 
she was conscious of having suppressed her dreams and the 
hopes she had at first cherished after her meeting with Rostow. 

The day after her party the governor's wife went off to call 
on Mrs. Malvintzew to communicate her scheme; while she 
insisted that under existing circumstances any regular courting 
in due form was out of the question, she represented that there 
was nothing to prevent the young people being brought together, 
and she asked her consent, which was heartily given. This 
point being settled, she spoke of Rostow in Princess Maria’s 
presence, and told her how he had coloured at the mention of 
her name. Maria, however, instead of fecling any pleasure at 
hearing this, was indefinably uneasy ; she could no longer boast 
of the calm philosophy of which she had once been so proud, 
and she felt her hopes, her doubts and remorse waking within 
her with increased vividness. 

During the two days which elapsed between this visit and 


190 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


Rostow’s call, she never ceased thinking of how she ought to 
behave to him. Sometimes she resolved that she would not 
appear in her aunt’s drawing-room, under the pretext of recent 
mourning, and in. the same breath told herself that this would 
be a breach of politeness towards a man who had done her a 
signal service. Sometimes she suspected that her aunt and 
the governor's wife were plotting round her and Nicholas, 
and then she reproached herself for having such notions, and 
ascribed them to her own evil mind. How could they think of 
arranging a marriage for her when she was still in the deepest 
mourning? And yet she racked her brain to compose phrases 
with which to meet him; only, in her fear of saying too much 
or too little, she could not satisfy herself; besides, would not her 
emotion betray itself in her embarrassment at seeing him again? 

But when, after mass on Sunday, her servant came to 
announce Count Rostow, her face flushed slightly, and her eyes 
were brighter than usual; these were the only indications of 
what was going on in her secret soul. 

*Have you seen him, aunt?" she asked, surprised at her 
own tranquillity. 

Nicholas entered the room; Princess Maria looked away a 
moment so as to give him time to pay his respects to her aunt; 
then, raising her head, she looked full at him. She held out her 
delicate soft hand with graceful dignity, and spoke a few words; 
a feminine tenderness of tone—notes that till now had lain mute 
—vibrated in the ring of her voice. Mademoiselle Bourrienne, 
who happened to be present, looked at her in amazement. The 
most accomplished coquette could not have set to work more 
skilfully to fascinate her victim: “Is it that black becomes her, 
or is she really handsomer? And what tact! What charming 
grace! I never noticed it before," thought the Frenchwoman. 

If at that moment Princess Maria could have thought of 
herself, she would have been even more astonished than her 
companion at the change that had come over her. No sooner 
had she looked at the face that had grown so dear to her than 
a living glow, which made her speak and act quite irrespective 
of her will, flooded her being. Her features were transfigured 
and radiant with unlooked-for charm—like a vase whose finely 
chiselled sculptures seem mere opaque confusion til a light 
within shines through the opal sides. For the first time the 
travail through which her soul had passed—her griefs, her 
aspirations to perfection, her resignation, love, and self-sacrifice, 
were legible in the brilliancy of her expression, the sweetness 


191 


WAR AND PEACE 


of her smile, and every feature of her delicate face. Rostow 
saw it all as clearly as if he had known her all his life; he 
understood that he stood face to face with a being different 
to any he had yet met, different and much better, and, above 
all, superior to himself. 

The conversation turned on various subjects: they spoke 
of the war, of their last meeting — on which. Nicholas would 
not dwell— of the governor's wife and Rostow's relation. 
Princess Maria did not allude to her brother, and when her 
aunt spoke of him she changed the subject. It touched her 
too deeply to be a theme of a commonplace talk. Nicholas 
noticed this as he noticed with an unaccustomed penetration, 
all the shades of her character, which only served to strengthen 
his conviction that she was altogether an unusual person. 

During a pause which ensued Nicholas tried to avert the 
feeling of awkwardness by speaking to Prince Andrew's little 
boy, and asking him whether he would not like to be a hussar. 
He took him on his knee and played with him, and happening 
to look round at Princess Maria he met her touched and gratified 
glance; she was shyly watching her darling's contentment in 
the arms of the man she loved. He appreciated all the signi- 
ficance of that glance and coloured with pleasure as he heartily 
embraced the child. Still, he did not feel justified in repeating 
his visits too often, as she was in such deep mourning, though 
the governor's wife persisted in her scheming, and repeated 
everything pleasant that Princess Maria said about him, and 
vice versa. She insisted that he was to explain his intentions, 
and arranged that the young people should happen to meet at 
the archbishop's house for that express purpose. Rostow told 
her again and again that he had no wish to come to a declaration $ 
but he was forced to agree to meet her as had been planned. 

Just as at Tilsit, where he had not hesitated to accept what 
others thought right, so to-day, after a short but honest struggle 
between his wish to work out his life to his own taste and his 
humble submission to fate, he took the path into which he felt 
drawn in spite of himself. He knew that any expression of 
sentiment to Princess Maria, while he still held himself bound 
to Sonia, was an act of treachery of which he was incapable: 
at the same time he had a lurking idea at the bottom of his 
heart, that by giving himself up to the guidance of circum- 
stances and of other people, he not only would be doing nothing 
wrong, but would be accepting the fulfilment of an important 
event in his life. After his interview with Princess Maria he 


192 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


lived to all appearance the same life as he had always led, but 
the pleasures which had amused him hitherto had lost all their 
charm; the ideas he associated with her had nothing in common 
with those which the society of other girls had suggested to 
him, nor with the romantic love that he had indulged for the 
image of Sonia. As his instincts were virtuous, whenever he 
had connected any woman with his dreams of marriage he had 
always seen her sitting behind the samovar in a white morning- 
gown, surrounded with children, who called them papa and 
mamma, and he had indulged in visions of the minutest details 
of family life. But the thought of Princess Maria raised no 
such pictures as these; in vain did he try to foresee their future 
life together: it was all vague and ill-defined, and the chief 
association it brought was a kind of fear. 


CHAPTER LXII 


THE news of the fearful battle of Borodino, and the enormous 
losses to the Russians in killed and wounded, and the still more 
terrible news about the loss of Moscow, reached Voronége late 
in September. Princess Maria having learnt from the news- 
papers of her brother's wound but receiving no definite news 
from him himself, made up her mind to start in search of 
him; Nicholas, who had not met her again, heard this later 
from several people. 

All these disasters did not rouse him to a desire for vengeance, 
or reduce him to despair, he only felt that it was not fitting 
that he should prolong his stay at Voronége. All the talk that 
he heard rang false on his ear; he knew not what to think of 
these events, and felt that he should not thoroughly understand 
them til he found himself once more in the atmosphere of 
regimental life. So he hastened to make up his complement of 
beasts, and got into rages with his servant and quartermaster 
more often than usual. 

A few days before his departure there was a solemn Te Deum 
at the cathedral in honour of the successes of the Russian 
armies. He attended the service with the rest of the world, and 
took up a position not far from the governor; then, having put 
on an officially solemn face, he was at liberty to think of other 
things. When the ceremony was over the governor's wife 
beckoned to him: 

“Do you see the princess?" she said, pointing to a lady in 


193 


WAR AND PEACE 


mourning kneeling apart. Nicholas had in fact seen and 
recognised her, not from her profile, of which he could but just 
catch a glimpse under her bonnet, but from the instinctive 
sympathy and bashfulness which had come over him on first 
seeing her. Princess Maria was absorbed in her devotions, 
crossing herself as she was about to leave the church. The 
expression of her face startled him: the features were the same 
and bore traces of the struggles of her patient soul; but an 
inward flame showed them in a new light, and at that moment 
she was a pathetic embodiment of sorrow, prayerfulness, and 
faith. Without consulting his monitress, without asking him- 
self how far it was right for him to address her in church, he 
went towards her to assure her of his sympathy in the new blow 
that had fallen on her. She no sooner heard his voice than a 
sudden flash of joy mingled with pain shone in her eyes. 

"I wanted to tell you, princess,” said Rostow, “that as 
Prince Andrew is in command of a regiment, if he had been 
killed the papers would certainly have announced the fact.” 
She looked at him, not heeding his words, but giving herself 
up to the charm of being sympathised with by him. “I have 
known many cases in which wounds caused by the bursting of 
a shell were quite trifling when they were not immediately 
fatal. We must hope for the best, and I am sure that . . .” 

“Oh! it would be too dreadful! . . ." she exclaimed, inter- 
rupting him, and then, as her agitation was too great to allow 
of her saying more, she gave him a grateful look and joined her 
aunt, bowing gracefully as she turned away: all her movement: 
were graceful under the influence of his presence. 

Nicholas remained in his lodgings that evening with a view 
to concluding his bargains and accounts with the horse-dealers. 
When this was done—it being too late to go out, and too early 
to go to bed—he rose and paced his room, thinking over his 
whole life—a rare thing for him. Princess Maria had made a 
deep impression upon him at their first meeting at Smolensk. 
The fact that the manner of it was so unusual and that his 
mother had already mentioned her as a possible rich wife, 
caused him to pay special attention to her. In Voronége the 
impression was even deeper. He was struck by the particular 
moral beauty which this time he noticed in her. And although 
he was leaving Voronége, it never entered his head to regret 
his departure because of losing his opportunities of seeing her. 
His meeting in the morning with Princess Maria had made too 
deep an impression on him for his peace. Her thin, colourless, 


194 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


melancholy face, her luminous gaze, her soft and gracious move- 
ments, and above all the deep, tender sorrow which seemed 
to pervade her whole person agitated him and commanded 
his sympathy. While Rostow could not endure any evidence 
of lofty moral sentiments in a man—and for this reason had 
never liked Prince Andrew, whom he chose to regard as a 
philosophical dreamer—in Princess Maria this depth of sorrow, 
which revealed to him a spiritual world where he was a stranger, 
was irresistibly attractive to him. 

“What a wonderful woman! She must really be an angel! 
Why am I not free? Why was I in such a hurry to engage 
myself to Sonia?” and he involuntarily compared her lack 
with Princess Maria’s abundance of those graces of the soul 
which he knew that he had not, and which for that very reason 
he prized so highly. He indulged in visions of how he would 
have acted if he had been free—how he would have wooed her 
and have made her his wife; but at the thought a chill came 
over him, and beyond that all was confusion: it seemed im- 
possible to picture Princess Maria in any smiling domestic 
scene. He loved her, but he did not understand her, while 
in thinking of Sonia everything was clear and simple; she had 
nothing mysterious about her. Thoughts of Sonia were always 
joyful, amusing, whereas thoughts of Princess Maria were 
difficult and even a little frightening. 

“How she was praying!” said he to himself. “That is 
the faith that can remove mountains, and I am sure her 
prayers will be heard. Why cannot I pray like that and ask 
for everything I need? 

“What is it that I need? To be free, to break off with 
Sonia! The governor’s wife is right: my marriage with her 
can only lead to misfortune, to mamma’s despair, to confusion. 
Oh, what a miserable mess! Besides, I do not love her—as 
I ought to love her! Oh, Lord! Who can help me out of 
this desperate dilemma? Yes, prayers will move mountains, 
but one must believe, and not pray as Natacha and I used to 
do when we were children for the snow to turn to sugar and then 
run out to taste it and see if it had turned to sugar. No, it 
is for something serious that I am praying now.” 

He laid down his pipe and clasping his hands he stood in 
front of the Holy Images, his eyes full of tears and his heart 
full of Princess Maria, and prayed as he had not prayed for 
many a long day. Suddenly the door opened and Lavrouchka 
came in, carrying some letters. 


195 


WAR AND PEACE 


“Idiot!” cried Nicholas starting from his devotional attitude. 
" What business have you to come in without being called?” 

"From the governor," said Lavrouchka in a sleepy voice. 
“A courier has come in. Here is a letter for you." 

“Thanks, all right; be off!” 

There were two letters, one from his mother and one from 
Sonia; he read Sonia’s first. He turned pale as he read, and 
his eyes opened wide with joy and alarm: “No! Impossible!” 
he exclaimed aloud. His excitement was too great to allow him 
to sit still, and he read the letter striding up and down the 
room. He read it once, twice, and finally with a shrug of 
sheer amazement, stood still, his mouth and eyes wide open. 

His prayer had been heard! He was as completely astounded 
as though it had really been the most wonderful thing in the 
world, and he was tempted to regard such an immediate- 
fulfilment of his wishes as a proof that it was the result of 
chance and not of the direct interposition of God. The Gordian 
knot that had fettered his future life was cut by Sonia’s letter. 
She wrote that the Rostows had lost the larger part of their 
fortune by the recent catastrophes, and that this, added to the 
countess’s constantly expressed wish to see Nicholas married to 
Princess Bolkonsky, with his silence and coldness had made 
her determine to release him from his pledge and give him 
back his word. “It is too painful to me," she added, “to 
think that I could ever be the cause of trouble or dissension in 
a family which has loaded me with benefits. As my love can 
only aim at promoting the happiness of those I love, I entreat 
you, Nicholas, to consider yourself free, and to believe that 
come what may, no one will ever love you more truly than 


“Your Sonia.” 


The letter from the countess gave an account of their last 
days at Moscow, of their departure, of the conflagration, and 
of the total wreck of their property. She added that Prince 
Andrew, very seriously wounded, was travelling with them, that 
the doctor now hoped that his life might be saved; Sonia and 
Natacha were his nurses. 

Nicholas carried this letter next morning to Princess Maria; 
they neither of them made any comment on Natacha’s attend- 
ance on the wounded man. This letter made them feel on the 
footing of relations; Nicholas, indeed, saw the princess off to 
Yaroslaw, and then rejoined his regiment. 


196 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


CHAPTER LXIII 


Sonra’s letter, written from the Troitsky monastery, was the 
outcome of several events that had happened in the family. 
Above every other consideration in the countess’s mind, her 
wish to see Nicholas marry a rich heiress remained paramount; 
and Sonia, who in her eyes was the chief obstacle, had been 
made painfully aware of it, especially after she had heard of her 
son’s meeting with Princess Maria. The countess never missed 
an opportunity of casting some cruel and insulting hint at her. 
A few days before they left Moscow she had sent for her niece, 
but instead of reproaching her, she implored her with bitter 
weeping to release Nicholas from his promise and so pay her 
debt of gratitude to those who had been parents to her. “I 
shall never be happy till you have said yes.” 

Sonia replied, with many tears, that she would do anything 
that was required of her; still, she could not make up her 
mind to pledge herself formally. It was natural to her to 
sacrifice herself for others, and in the existing state of affairs 
the only way in which she could show her gratitude at all was 
by constantly sacrificing herself. She felt at the same time 
that each act of abnegation added to her value in their eyes, 
and, of itself, made her more worthy of Nicholas, whom she 
worshipped. But the offering she was now required to make 
entailed a renunciation of ali that she had counted on as the 
reward of her past life, of everything that made the future worth 
living for. For the first time her soul was bitter: she turned 
against those who had rescued her from poverty only to load her 
with far greater miseries. She turned against Natacha, whose 
feelings had never been outraged or thwarted—on the contrary, 
they were a law to all who came within reach of her, and yet 
who could help loving her? She felt too, for the first time, 
that her love, till now so placid and pure, was turning to a 
vehement passion outside the pale of law, virtue, and religion. 
The experience of her life had taught her extreme reserve, so 
the very violence of this storm led her to reply to the countess 
in general terms, and she determined to wait till she should see 
Nicholas, intending not to release him indeed, but to bind him 
more firmly and for ever. 

The anxieties of the last few days in Moscow had diverted 
her mind from her woes, which she was glad to lose sight of in 
the whirl of occupations that fell upon her; but when she 


197 


WAR AND PEACE 


heard that Prince Andrew was under the same roof, in spite of 
her sympathy for him and for Natacha, a superstitious gladness 
came over her. She thought that, in this coincidence, she saw 
the hand of Providence interfering to prevent her being divided 
from Nicholas. She knew that Natacha had never really ceased 
to love Prince Andrew; and she foresaw that now that they 
were thrown together again their affection would take new life, 
and that then Nicholas could not marry Princess Maria, who 
in the event she anticipated would be his sister-in-law. And 
so, in spite of the grief and distress that she saw on all sides, 
this visible intervention of Heaven in her private concerns 
caused her the most soothing satisfaction. 

The Rostows halted for a night at the Troitsky monastery. 
Three large rooms had been reserved for them in the convent 
inn; one was given up to Prince Andrew, who was better that 
day. Natacha was sitting with him while the count and 
countess were in the next room conversing with the Superior 
who had received them gladly as old friends. Sonia, who was 
with them, was wondering what Prince Andrew and Natacha 
could find to say to each other. Suddenly the door opened and 
Natacha, greatly agitated, came straight up to Sonia, without 
heeding the monk who rose to greet her. 

“Natacha, what are you thinking of? Come here,” said her 
mother. She went to the Father Superior and received his 
blessing; he urged her to implore the help of God and of the 
blessed Saint Sergius. As soon as he was gone she dragged 
Sonia away into the empty room. 

“Sonia, he will live! Don't you think he will? Oh! I am 
so happy and so miserable! Everything is right between us. 
If only he might live—but he cannot. . . ." She burst into 
tears. 

Sonia, equally agitated by her friend's sorrow and her own 
secret anxieties, embraced and comforted her. 

“Yes, if only he might live!" she said to herself. 

They stole to the door of Prince Andrew's room and opened 
it a little way; they could see him lie there, his head propped 
on three pillows. He was resting with his eyes shut, and 
breathing regularly. 

“Oh! Natacha!” Sonia suddenly exclaimed, seizing her hand 
and starting back. 

“What? What is it?” asked Natacha. 

“Tt was that, of course, of course," Sonia went on, turning 
very pale as she shut the door. “Do you remember,” she 


198 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


said, half solemn and half scared, “when I looked in the glass 
that Christmas, I saw . . ." 

“Yes, yes,” said Natacha, staring at her and dimly recalling 
Sonia’s vision. 

“You remember—I told you and Douniacha at the time. I 
saw him lying down with his eyes shut, and a pink coverlet 
over him—just as he is now." 

And growing more eager as she spoke she described all the 
details of the scene as it actually was, referring them to that 
second sight at Christmas, till her imagination no longer doubted 
its reality. 

“Yes, to be sure, the pink counterpane," said Natacha 
pensively, and feeling that she had seen it too. “But what 
can it mean?" 

“I don't know—it is most extraordinary,” replied Sonia. 

- A few minutes later Prince Andrew rang and Natacha went in 
to him; Sonia, overwhelmed by a tender pathos which she very 
seldom felt, stood looking out of a window, quite bewildered 
by all these strange coincidences. 


An opportunity offered that very day of sending letters to 
the army ; the countess took advantage of it to write to her son. 

"Sonia, will you not write to Nicholas?" she said in a rather 
tremulous voice. The young girl understood the entreaty con- 
veyed in the appeal; she could read in the countess's eyes, as 
she looked up over her spectacles, all the difficulties that had 
prompted the hint and the hostility that lurked ready to break 
out if she refused. She went up to the countess, knelt down 
by her and kissed her hand, saying: “ Mamma, I will write.” 

Under the prompting of that mysterious presentiment, of 
which the fulfilment would inevitably prevent a marriage 
between Nicholas and Princess Maria, she did not hesitate to 
sacrifice herself as usual. With tears in her eyes and a deep 
sense of the magnanimity of her own action, she sat down, 
and frequently interrupted by her own sobs wrote the letter 
which had so greatly perturbed Nicholas. 


199 


WAR AND PEACE 


CHAPTER LXIV 


WHEN they had reached the guard-house the officer and 
soldiers who had captured Peter treated him with no little 
enmity, in remembrance no doubt of the struggle they had 
had with him; but they behaved to him, nevertheless, with a 
certain degree of respect. They wondered with much curiosity 
whether they might not have laid hands on some person of im- 
portance, and when guard was relieved next day Peter observed 
that the new-comers had not the same consideration. To them, 
in fact, this big man in his caftan, was not the authoritative 
citizen who had rated the chief and awed the patrol, but simply 
No. 17 of the prisoners left in their charge by superior com- 
mand. If there was anything particular about Peter it was 
only his bold and pensive appearance and the fact that he 
spoke French so extraordinarily well. In spite of this, however, 
that same day he was put in with the other prisoners, the 
room he had so far had to himself being wanted by an officer. 
All the men who were locked up with him were of inferior 
rank; and they, having recognised Peter as a gentleman and 
heard him speak French, avoided him. 

They all, himself included, were to be tried for incendiarism, 
and on the third day they were led to a house where a general 
with a white moustache was holding court-martial, with the 
assistance of two colonels and some other French officers. He 
questioned the prisoners with that sharp precision which would 
seem properly to belong only to a being superior to all human 
weaknesses: “Who was he? Where had he been going, and 
what for?” etc. 

These inquiries, which had nothing to do with the essence of 
the matter, and so made the chances of arriving at the truth 
more and more remote, had the same tendency as a judge’s 
questions invariably have: namely to suggest to the accused 
the direct way to the desired end, which is that he should 
inculpate himself. Peter, like every man who has found him- 
self in a similar predicament, wondered with amazement why 
he was asked such questions; they were, after all, but an 
empty mockery of benevolent formality. He knew that he 
was in their power—in the power of that brute force which 
had brought him before his judges and gave them the right to 
exact compromising answers. 

He was asked what he was doing when he was arrested. He 


200 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


replied that he was seeking for the parents of a child he had 
saved from the flames. 

“Why had he collared the thief?” : 

“Because I was trying to defend a woman he had attacked, 
and it was the duty of every honest man. . . ." He was 
stopped: this was an unnecessary digression. 

“Why had he gone into the courtyard of the burning house?” 

“He had come out to see what was going on." Again he 
was interrupted: He was not asked where he was going but 
what he was doing there. 

When they asked his name he refused to give it. 

“Write that down; that does not look well, in fact it is very 
bad . . ." said the general. 

On the fourth day after their arrest the fires reached the 
quarter where they were imprisoned. Peter and his companions 
were brought out and locked up in the coach-house of a large 
warehouse. As they went through the streets they were 
smothered in smoke; the fire was still steadily gaining ground. 
Though he could not even now appreciate the magnitude of 
the conflagration he gazed at the spectacle with horror. 

For four days they remained in this new prison, and he 
learned from the French soldiers that they expected every 
moment to hear what decision the marshal had come to with 
respect to their fate. What marshal? They did not know. 
The days which dragged on till the 8th (2oth) of September, 
when they were again examined, were days of misery to Peter. 


CHAPTER LXV 


On. that day a superior officer, a very great man it would 
seem from the respect shown to him by the sentinels, came to 
inspect the prisoners. He evidently belonged to the staff, and 
held a list from which he called their names. Peter was put 
down as “the man who will not give his name!” After looking 
them down with utter indifference, he ordered the officer on 
guard to see that they were made tidy enough to appear before 
the marshal. An hour later a company of soldiers escorted the 
whole party to Diévitchy-Polé (the Maiden's field). 

The day was fine and bright after rain and the air marvel- 
lously clear; the smoke did not hang low over the ground, but 
rose in pillars to the blue sky over the city; though the flames 


201 


WAR AND PEACE 


were invisible in the sunlight, Moscow was nothing but an 
immense heap of burning fuel; on all sides nothing was to be 
seen but devastated spaces, smoking rubbish, and blackened 
walls with stoves and tall chimneys still clinging to them. 
It was in vain that Peter scanned the ruins, he could not 
recognise any part of the city. Here and there a church stood 
up intact, and the Kremlin, which the fire had not reached, 
gleamed white in the distance, with the tower of Ivan Véliki. 
Close by glittered the belfry of the convent of Novo-Diévitchy, 
where a loud peal was calling the faithful to prayer. Peter 
remembered that it was a Sunday, and the festival of the 
Nativity of the Virgin; but who could be celebrating it in 
the midst of fire and destruction? 

As they went along they met only a few people in rags, who 
hid themselves in terror at the approach of the French. It 
was quite clear that the nest of Russia was wrecked; still 
Peter had an indistinct perception that this wrecking of the 
nest was preparatory to a new order of things. Everything 
seemed to bear assurance of it, without his attempting to reason 
it out: their brisk steady march, the straight file of their escort, 
the presence of the French official who passed them on the 
road in a carriage driven by a private, the sound of military 
music marching to meet him across the square, even the list 
that had been read out this morning. And he—he was being 
led he knew not whither; but he could read in the faces of 
their escort that the orders given as to the fate of the prisoners 
would be carried out without mercy, and he felt that he was 
no more than a wisp of straw caught in the cogs of a machine 
new to him, but working with utter regularity. 

He and his companions were conducted a little way beyond 
the monastery to a large white house in the midst of a fine 
garden on the right-hand side of the square, and he recognised 
it as belonging to Prince Stcherbatow with whom he had been 
intimate; it was at present inhabited by Marshal Davoust, 
Prince of Eckmühl, as he gathered from the soldiers’ talk. 
The Russians were taken in one by one; Peter was the sixth. 
He was led along a glass gallery and across a vestibule, into a 
large low study which he knew very well; an aide-de-camp 
was standing at the door. Davoust was seated at the farther 
end of the room, his spectacles on his nose, absorbed in reading 
a paper that lay on the table: he did not look up. 

'* Who are you?” he asked, in a low voice, addressing Peter, 
who was standing close to him. 


202 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


Peter made no reply; he had not the strength to speak, for 
to him Davoust was not merely a French general, but a man 
noted for his cruelty. As he looked at the hard, cold face— 
reminding him of that of a stern schoolmaster, who condescends 
to a few minutes’ patience while he waits for an answer—he 
fully understood that every moment's delay might cost him his 
life. But what was he to say? It struck him as quite useless 
to repeat all he had said the first time, but it was alike shameful 
and dangerous to reveal his name and rank. The silence 
remained unbroken; but presently Davoust raised his head, 
took off his spectacles, and scowled at him with a fixed stare. 

“I know that man," he said in a rough, hard voice, intended 
to alarm the accused. Peter shuddered. 

"No, general, you cannot know me; I have never seen 
yours” 

“He is a Russian spy,” said Davoust, interrupting him, and 
speaking to another general. 

“No, highness,” Peter eagerly repeated; he had just re- 
membered that Davoust was a prince. “No, highness, you 
cannot know me. I am an officer of militia, and I have not 
been out of Moscow." 

“Your name?” said the marshal. 

““Bésoukhow.” 

“And what is to prove to me that you are not lying?” 

“Highness!” exclaimed Peter, in entreaty rather than in 
anger. 

Davoust raised his eyes and fixed them on Peter. They 
looked at each other like this for several seconds, and this 
look was his saving. In spite of the war, and the position in 
which they stood to each other, a human feeling rose up between 
the two men. At the first glance that the marshal had cast at 
the list in which the men were so many ciphers, and Peter, as 
being nameless, a mere incident, he could have ordered him to 
be shot without dreaming that he could do wrong; but now he 
recognised him as a man—they were brothers. 

“How can you prove that you are telling the truth?” 

Peter remembered Ramballe, and mentioned his name, with 
the number of his regiment, and the street in which he had 
quartered himself. 

“You are not what you represent yourself,” Davoust repeated. 

Peter in an agitated voice again gave the evidence of his 
veracity. An aide-de-camp just then came in, and gave the 
marshal some news which delighted him. He rose to go out, 


203 


WAR AND PEACE 


having quite forgotten the prisoner. The aide-de-camp re- 
minded him; he ordered that he should be led away. Whither? 
Peter could not guess. Where were they going to take him? 
Back to the coach-house, or to the place of execution, which 
his companions had pointed out as they crossed the square. 

“Yes, of course,” said Davoust, in answer to a question 
from his companion, which Peter had not heard. 

Then he was led out. 

He never knew how long they were on that march; he went 
on mechanically, like his companions in misfortune: he saw 
nothing, heard nothing, and only stopped because the others 
stopped. One single idea racked his brain: Who was it that had 
condemned him to death? Not those who had just examined 
him; they would not, and indeed could not have done it. Not N 
Davoust, who had looked at him with true humanity: a minute 
more, and he would have understood that he was making a 
mistake; the aide-de-camp’s entrance had forestalled it. Who 
then had condemned him to die? Who could decide that he 
should be killed—he, so full of memories, hopes, and ideas! 
Who could do such a thing? Who was the immediate agent? 
No one. He saw, he understood that it was the outcome of 
the order of things, and the inevitable result of circumstances. 


CHAPTER LXVI 


THE prisoners were led from Prince Stcherbatow’s mansion 
across the square, towards a kitchen garden, a little to the left; 
there stood an upright post; behind it a large ditch had been 
dug—the fresh earth was thrown up ail round it. A crowd 
stood in a semicircle, gazing into this pit with uneasy curiosity. 
It consisted of some Russians, with a large proportion of soldiers 
in the French army, but of various nationalities, and wearing a 
great variety of uniforms. To the right and left of the stake 
stood files of soldiers in dark-blue greatcoats, red epaulettes 
gaiters, and shakos. The condemned were placed inside the 
circle in the order of their numbers. Peter again was sixth. 
A roll of drums was beaten on both sides at once; he felt his 
soul wrung by the clamour; it deprived him of the faculty of 
thought. He could scarcely see or hear, and one only desire 
possessed him: that of getting it over—that dreadful and 
inexorable “It” which hung over him! 


204 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


The two men at the end of this row were convicts, one tall 
and lean; the other a swarthy, muscular fellow, with a broken 
nose. Next to him, No. 3, was a fine stalwart man, with iron- 
grey hair, of about five-and-forty. The fourth was a peasant, 
with a pleasant bright face, black eyes, and russet beard; the 
fifth a factory hand, pale and sallow, a lad of eighteen or so, 
wrapped in a long coat. Peter gathered that the French 
officers were consulting as to whether they should be shot in 
batches, or one by one. 

“Two at a time,” said the captain, with cold indifference. 

There was a stir in the ranks, evidently not arising from any 
eagerness on the part of the men to execute a regular order, 
but from their anxiety to have done with a horrible and incom- 
prehensible task. A civil functionary with a scarf on came 
forward, and read the sentence to the prisoners in French and 
in Russian; then four soldiers pinioned the two convicts. While 
someone was sent for bandages for their eyes they stood looking 
about them like wild beasts driven into a corner, and watching 
the approach of the huntsman; one crossed himself; the other 
scratched his back and moved his lips as if smiling. When 
their eyes were bandaged, and they were tied up to the post, 
twelve men stepped out of the ranks, and stood eight paces 
from the prisoners. Peter turned away, not to see what would 
happen. Suddenly a volley was fired. To Peter it seemed 
louder than a thunder-clap; he looked round, and in the midst 
of a cloud of smoke he perceived a party of Frenehmen, pale 
and tremulous, who were busy round the trench. 

The two next victims were led out; their imploring looks 
seemed to claim some help, some rescue, as if they could not 
believe that they were to be bereft of life. Again Peter looked 
away ; a louder report than ever rang in his ear. With a heaving 
chest he looked round at the men who stood near him—on 
every face he saw the expression of the same amazement, horror, 
and disgust that were seething in his soul. 

“Whose doing is it? They are all as much sickened as I 
am," he muttered to himself. 

“File of the 86th, forward!” cried a voice. 

Then No. 5 was led out alone. Peter was so terror-stricken, 
that he failed to understand that he and the rest were reprieved ; 
that they had only been brought out to see the execution of 
these five. The young workman started back as the soldiers 
touched him, and clung to Peter; Peter, with a shudder, released 
himself from the grasp of the poor wretch who could not stand 


205 


WAR AND PEACE 


alone; they seized him by the arms, and dragged him along. 
He was shrieking with all his might, but when he was attached 
to the stake he was silent, as if he understood that cries were 
useless, or hoped perhaps that he might yet be spared. 

Peter’s curiosity was stronger than his horror; this time he 
did not turn away or shut his eyes. The excitement he felt, 
and which was shared by the crowd, had reached an acute pitch. 
The victim had recovered himself; he buttoned up his coat, 
rubbed his bare feet one on the other, and arranged the knot of 
his bandage; when he was tied to the post he drew himself 
up and stood straight on his feet, without losing nerve again. 
Peter watched every movement; he could not take his eyes off 
him. A word of command was given, no doubt, and twelve 
muskets fired in obedience to it, but he never could remember 
having heard them; he suddenly saw the man double up, 
blood spurted from two wounds, the cords yielded under the 
weight of the body, the head drooped and the legs gave way, so 
that the dying man hung in a strangely distorted posture. No 
one held him up. Those who stood nearest to him had turned 
pale, and the old moustachioed soldier’s lip quivered as he untied 
the cords. The body fell in a heap; the soldiers clutched it 
clumsily, dragged it away and pushed it into the trench. They 
looked like criminals themselves, hurriedly hiding the traces 
of a murder. 

Peter glanced in. He could see the body of the workman 
with the knees drawn up to the head, and one shoulder higher 
than the other; that shoulder slowly rose and fell with con- 
vulsive jerks—but shovelfuls of earth fell fast all the time, 
forming a heap that covered him. One of the soldiers called to 
Peter with angry impatience; he did not hear him, but stood 
rooted to the spot. When the trench was filled up, another 
word of command was given. Peter was led back slowly to his 
place, the soldiers faced half right about, and slowly marched 
past the stake. The twenty-four soldiers whose guns had been 
fired, fell in as the files went by them—all but one, quite a lad, 
as pale as death, who remained, without moving from the spot 
by the side of the grave where he had stood to fire; his shako 
had fallen back on to the nape of his neck, and his musket was 
reversed ; he staggered like a drunken man, swaying backwards 
and forwards to save himself from faling. An old sergeant ran 
towards him, seized him by the shoulder, and pulled him back 
to his place. The crowd slowly dispersed ; everyone hanging 
his head in silence. 


206 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


“That will give them a lesson! Those rascally incendiaries 

' said a Frenchman, and Peter looked round to see who 

had spoken. It was a soldier, evidently trying to reconcile 

himself to the deed he had just done; but he did not finish his 
sentence, and went off with a dejected air. 


CHAPTER LXVII 


PETER was parted from his companions and placed by himself 
in a little deserted chapel. Late in the day a subaltern on 
guard came with two soldiers to inform him that he was reprieved 
and to be allowed to join the prisoners of war. He followed 
them, without understanding what was happening, to some 
wooden huts, half-burnt down; and in one of these he was left. 
It was dark inside, and he found himself one of a party of about 
twenty, without „forming any conception of who they were or 
what was being done with him. He heard voices—he answered 
questions—he saw all these faces—but his mind worked only 
as a machine works. 

From the moment when he had seen those hideous murders 
committed by executioners to order, it was as though the nerve 
which gave life and sense to all he saw had been torn from his 
brain, and everything had crumbled into nothingness. Though, 
as yet, he was not conscious of the process, that hour’s experience 
had extinguished in his soul all faith in the perfection of creation, 
in the human soul, in his own, in the very existence of God. 
Peter had been through such a crisis before, but he had never 
felt its effects so vividly. Formerly the doubts that had assailed 
him had their source in his own shortcomings, and then he had 
sought the remedy in himself; but this time he could not blame 
himself for the collapse of all his beliefs, which had left behind 
it nothing but shapeless and nameless ruins. He felt that a 
return of faith was no longer dependent on him. 

A place was found for him in a corner of the hovel, in the 
midst of a group who seemed to be amused and interested by 
his presence. He sat down on a heap of straw, and remained 
there silent and motionless, opening and shutting his eyes, and 
still haunted by the horrible vision of the victims and of the 
men who, in spite of themselves, had been their executioners. 
His immediate neighbour was a little man sitting quite doubled 
up, and whose presence indeed was at first only perceptible by 


207 


WAR AND PEACE 


the unpleasant smell of his person. It was so dark that Peter 
could scarcely distinguish him, but he felt that the little man 
frequently raised his head to look round at him. So with a 
determined effort of attention he at last succeeded in perceiving 
that this man was baring his feet, and the process attracted his 
interest. The man unfastened a narrow band of linen in which 
one foot was wrapped, and slowly and carefully rolled it up; 
then he performed the same operation on the other foot. Finally 
he hung up his bands of linen on pegs over his head, took 
out a knife, cut something, shut the knife again and put it 
away. Having finished, he clasped his knees and sat staring 
at Peter. His quiet, deliberate movements had a soothing effect 
on Peter’s nerves. 

“Have you gone through much misery, master?” he said, 
and there was such genuine and simple kindliness in his drawling ^ 
accent, that Peter felt the tears choking him as he was about 
to reply. The little man guessed as much, and to give him 
time to recover himself, he went on: “Ah! my friend, do not 
take it too much to heart! We suffer for an hour and live 
an age. Thank God we are yet alive! There are good and 
bad men everywhere.” And as he spoke he hastily rose and 
went across the room. 

“What, you old rascal, are you back again?” said the kind 
voice presently, at the other end of the hut. “Back again, ha, 
ha! You have a good memory!" he patted a little dog that 
came leaping after him as he turned to his corner, holding in 
his hand a parcel wrapped in a handkerchief. 

“Here, master—you would like something to eat, would not 
you?" he said, untying the bundle and offering Peter some 
baked potatoes. “We had a mess of soup at noon, but these 
potatoes are capital." The mere smell of them tempted Peter, 
who had eaten nothing all day; he thanked his friend and 
accepted one. 

* Well, how does that do?" said the little man, also taking a 
potato. He cut it in half, sprinkled it with some salt out of the 
handkerchief, and offered some to Peter. “A very good thing 
1s à potato; eat away,” and Peter thought he had never eaten 
anything better. 

“All this is a trifle,’ he said presently. “But why did 
they shoot those poor wretches? The youngest was not 
twenty!” 

“Hush, hush!” murmured the little man. “Tell me, master, 
what made you remain in Moscow?” 


208 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


“I did not think they would be here so soon. I stayed quite 
by chance.” 

“And how did they get hold of you? In your own house?” 

"I went out -to see the fire; there they caught me, and 
condemned me as an incendiary." 

“Where there is judging there is always injustice," said the 
little man. 

“And you—have you been here long?” 

"I? Since Sunday. They fetched me out of hospital.” 

“You are a soldier then?” 

"In Apchéron's regiment. I was dying of fever. We had 
never heard a word about it; twenty of us all lying there, and 
we knew nothing." 

* And here I suppose you are pretty sick of it?” 

"How can one help being sick of it! Plato Karataiew is 
my name," said he, to make conversation easier between him- 
self and his neighbour, “and the men used to call me the little 
hawk. How can one help being sad? Moscow is the mother 
of all our cities! But you, master, must have lands and a 
house; your cup must be full—and a wife, too, perhaps? And 
an old father and mother—are they alive?" 

Though Peter could not see his face he felt that his neighbour 
was turning to him with a friendly smile, and thought him very 
much to be pitied when he heard that he had no parents—above 
all, no mother. 

“A wife for good counsel and a mother-in-law for a warm 
welcome—but nothing can make up for a mother! And have 
you any children?" Peter's negative evidently distressed him, 
and he hastened to add: 

* But you are both young. God may grant them to you yet. 
Live on good terms, that is the great thing." 

“Oh, I do not care about it now!" Peter exclaimed 
involuntarily. 

“Heh! My good friend, there is no avoiding beggary or 
imprisonment! You see," he went on, clearing his throat for 
a long story, “my master’s estate was a fine one; we had no 
end of land, the peasants lived comfortably, and the labourers 
too, thank God! The corn yielded seven-fold, and we lived as 
good Christians should; till one day—" and Plato Karataiew 
told him how he had been caught one day by the forester of a 
neighbouring wood stealing logs, flogged, condemned and sent 
to serve in the army. ''And what then!" he added with a 
smile, “it looked like a misfortune, and it was really a blessing. 


209 


WAR AND PEACE 


If I had not gone wrong my brother would have had to go and 
leave five children behind him. I, you see, only left a wife; I 
had a little girl once, but God Almighty had taken her back 
again. I went home once on leave. What can I say about it? 
They live better than they used, though there are several 
mouths to fill; the women were at home, two of my brothers 
were away. Michael, the youngest, was the only one left. My 
father said to me: ‘All my children are just the same to me; it 
matters not which finger is nipped, it hurts just as much. If 
they had not caught Plato it would have been Michael.’ So 
then, would you believe it, he led us in front of the images: 
‘Michael,’ says he, ‘come here; bow down to the earth before 
Him, and you women too, and you little ones.’ Do you under- 
stand, master? That is -how fate takes us by chance, and we 
find fault and complain. Happiness is like the water in a 
landing-net; you pull it along and it is full—you lift it out and 
itis empty!” After a short pause Plato rose. 

“You would be glad to go to sleep, I daresay?” And he 
crossed himself repeatedly, muttering: "Lord Jesus Christ, 
Saint Nicholas, Samt Florus, and Saint Laura, have mercy 
upon us!" He touched the ground with his forehead, got up, 
sighed, and laid down on the straw, covering himself with his 
greatcoat. 

“What was that prayer you said?” 

"What?" said Plato, already half asleep. “I said my 
prayers, that is all. Don't you say your prayers?” 

“To be sure I do; but what were you saying about Florus 
and Laura?" 

“They are the patron saints of horses. We must not forget 
the poor dumb creatures. Do you see this little rascal? He 
has come here for warmth and shelter,” he added, stroking the 
dog, who had curled himself up at his feet. Then he turned 
over and was sound asleep in an instant. 

Outside, in the distance, wailing and shrieks were still to be 
heard, and the lurid glare of the fires gleamed between the ill- 
fitting planks of the hut; but within all was calm, dark and 
silent. It was long before Peter fell asleep; he lay with his eyes 
wide open in the gloom, listening vaguely to Plato’s steady 
snoring, and feeling that the world of beliefs which had 
crumbled away in his soul was undergoing resurrection once 
more, and built up now on immovable foundations. 


210 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


CHAPTER LXVIII 


PETER remained in this hut for four weeks, with twenty-three 
soldiers, three officers, and two civil officials, all prisoners like 
himself. They left scarcely a trace on his memory; no one 
survived from it but the figure of Plato, which he retained as 
one of his dearest and most vivid recollections—the perfect 
embodiment of all that is most genuinely Russian, warm- 
hearted, and true. When, the next morning by daylight, 
Peter saw his neighbour, the first impression of ‘‘roundness” 
was fully confirmed. Plato’s whole figure in its French soldier’s 
coat, cap, and bast shoes, was round. His head was quite 
round; back, chest, shoulders, even arms which he always 
carried as if he were about to embrace somebody, were round. 
His pleasant smile and large brown eyes were round. 

Plato Karataiew must have been about fifty years old, to 
judge from the service he had seen; he himself could not have 
told his age with any precision. When he laughed he displayed 
two rows of sound, white teeth; his beard and hair had not a 
streak of grey; his whole physique was characteristic of strength, 
and determination, and above all, of stoicism. Though his face 
was closely covered with tiny wrinkles, its expression was touch- 
ingly simple, youthful, and innocent. As he spoke in his soft, 
sing-song voice, his words flowed with natural eloquence; he 
never thought of what he had said or of what he was going to 
say, and the eagerness and variety of his tones gave them 
persuasive effect. His physical strength and stamina were 
such, that during the early part of his imprisonment, he seemed 
not to know what it was to be tired or ill. Every night and 
morning, as he lay down and got up again, he never failed to 
say: “Pray God, let me sleep like a stone and rise like a 
kalatch!”1 And in point of fact he had hardly laid himself 
down when he was dead asleep, and he woke in the morning 
fresh and gay, and ready for anything. 

He knew a little of everything, doing all neither very well 
nor very badly. He could cook, sew, carpenter, mend boots, 
and, being busy all day, never allowed himself to chatter and 
sing till the evening. Nor did he sing like a man who expects 
to be listened to; but as the birds of the air sing: it was as 
much a need of his nature as walking or stretching himself. 
His voice was tender, sweet, and plaintive, almost like a 

1 A fine light loaf. 


241 


WAR AND PEACE 


woman’s, in harmony with his serious face. After a few weeks 
in prison his beard had grown, and he looked as if he had 
shaken off all that was not absolutely native to him—a certain 
artificial look that had come to him with his soldier’s training 
—and had become what he really was: a peasant and a son 
of the soil. 

“A soldier on leave makes a shirt of his drawers!” he would 
say; he was not fond of talking of his long years of service, but 
was proud of saying that he had never been punished. When 
he told a story it was generally some episode of his early life 
which he loved to dwell on. The proverbs with which he gave 
point to his discourse were not coarse or vulgar, like those of 
his comrades, and he was fond of using popular expressions, 
which in themselves have no particular force, but which, when 
applied appropriately, are striking by their aptness and wisdom : 
in his mouth they acquired new value. 

In the opinion of the other prisoners Plato was just a soldier, 
to be made game of on occasion, and sent to do every kind of 
errand; but in Peter's mind he dwelt for ever after as the ideal 
type of simplicity and truth: always just what he had felt him 
to be from the first night he had spent by his side. 


CHAPTER LXIX 


Princess MARIA, on hearing from Nicholas that her brother 
was at Yaroslaw with the Rostows, decided on going thither, in 
spite of her aunt's remonstrances, and on taking her little 
nephew with her. The difficulties of the journey did not 
make her hesitate for a moment. Her duty lay before her: it 
was to nurse her brother who was suffering—perhaps dying, 
and to take him his child. If Prince Andrew had not asked 
to see her no doubt it was because his extreme weakness 
prevented him, or because he feared the long and fatiguing 
journey for her and the boy. 

A few days sufficed for her arrangements. Her conveyances 
were a large coach, in which she had travelled to Voronége, a 
britzska, and a fowrgon. Her party consisted of Mademoiselle 
Bourrienne, little Nicholas and his tutor, her old nurse, two 
maids, old Tikhone, a young footman, and a heyduc whom her 
aunt lent her as an escort. It was impossible to take the usual 
road through Moscow, so she must make a round by Lipetsk, 


DIO 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


Riazan, and Vladimir, where she had not a hope of finding 
post-horses; and the journey was all the more likely to be 
dangerous, as the French, it was said, had been seen in the 
neighbourhood of Riazan. Mademoiselle Bourrienne, Dessalles, 
and her servants were amazed at her unceasing activity and 
steady purpose. She was in bed the last and up the first; she 
allowed no obstacle to hinder her, and thanks to her energy, 
which kept them all up to the mark, they reached Yaroslaw in 
a fortnight. 

The last part of her stay at Voronége had brought her the 
greatest happiness of her life, for her love for Nicholas was no 
longer a torment to her; it filled her soul, and seemed to have 
become part of her being. The struggle was over; for, without 
confessing it to herself, ever since her last interview with him, 
she had felt sure of loving and being loved. She became 
certain of this at her last interview with Rostow when he came 
to inform her that her brother was with his people. Nicholas 
had not alluded to the renewal of the old engagement between 
Natacha and Prince Andrew, if he should recover, but Princess 
Maria could guess that it was constantly in his mind. His 
manner to her—tender, reserved, and thoughtful—did not 
change; on the contrary, he seemed pleased to think that this 
possible relationship set him at liberty to give expression to 
friendship, under which Princess Maria soon discerned love. 
She felt that she herself loved for the first and last time in 
her life, and, happy in believing herself beloved, she calmly 
abandoned herself to that happiness. 

This calmness did not prevent her feeling the keenest concern 
at the desperate situation in which she would find her brother; 
on the contrary, it left her mind free to think of it more 
exclusively. The deep anguish of her worn and heart-broken 
face made them all fear that she would fall seriously ill, but 
the difficulties and anxieties of the journey seemed to double 
her strength by occupying her thoughts, and so compelling her 
to forget, at any rate for the time, the object of her undertaking. 
Nevertheless, as she got nearer to Yaroslaw, remembering that 
within an hour or two her worst fears might be confirmed, her 
agitation was too much for her self-control. She sent forward 
the heyduc to ascertain where the Rostows were lodging, and 
inquire as to the state of Prince Andrew’s health. Having 
done so, he returned and met the carriage as it was entering the 
town. He was terrified at his mistress’s pallor as she put her 
head out of the window. 


219 


WAR AND PEACE 


“I have found out all you want to know, excellency. Count 
Rostow’s family live a little way from this, in a house belonging 
to a merchant named Bronnikow, on the banks of the Volga.” 

Princess Maria kept her eyes fixed on his face, wondering 
and fearing at his saying nothing in reply to the main question. 
Mademoiselle Bourrienne spoke the words. 

“And how is the prince?” she said. 

“His excellency is with the family.” 

“Then he is alive!" thought the princess. “And how is 
he?" she asked. 

“The servants say he is going on just the same.” 

What did that mean? She was afraid to ask, and glanced 
at the child who sat facing her—he was enchanted at finding 
himself in a large town. Then her head drooped, and she did 
not look up again till the heavy vehicle, creaking and rolling 
on its springs, suddenly stopped. The step was let down with ~ 
a clatter, and the door opened. On her left she caught sight of 
a sheet of water—the River Volga; on the right were some 
steps on which some servants were standing, with a young 
fresh-coloured girl, her head crowned with wide plaits of black 
hair, and an unpleasantly strained smile on her lips. This 
was Sonia. 

The princess eagerly ran up the steps, while Sonia, exclaimed: 
“This way, this way!" Then she found herself face to face 
with a rather Eastern-looking woman, advanced in years, who 
hurried forward to meet her. Overcome by emotion, the 
countess threw her arms round her, and kissed her again and 
again. 

"My child," she said, *I love you dearly—I have known 
you a long time. . . .” 

Princess Maria knew who it must be, and that she must 
respond to this effusiveness; but not knowing what to say she 
murmured a few words in French, and then asked: “And he 
—how is he?" 

“The doctor says he is out of danger," replied the countess, 
raising her eyes to heaven with a sigh that contradicted her words. 

“Where is he? Can I see him?” 

"Of course; in a few minutes, my dear. And is this his 
son?” added the countess, as Nicholas came in with his tutor. 
"What a sweet child! The house is a large one; there is 
room in it for everyone." 

Still petting the little boy, the countess led them into the 
drawing-room where Sonia was talking to Mademoiselle 


214 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


Bourrienne. The count came in to pay his respects to Princess 
Maria, who thought him greatly changed since she had last 
seen him; then he had been brisk, gay, and confident—now 
he was broken and bewildered: it was sad to see him. As he 
spoke to her he glanced stealthily round at the others as if to 
mark the effect of his words. Since the catastrophe at Moscow 
and his own ruin, uprooted from the surroundings and habits 
that made up his existence, he had, so to speak, lost his way 
and his place in life. 

In spite of her eager desire to see her brother as soon as 
possible, and the annoyance she felt at all these formalities and 
compliments to herself and her nephew, she took note of what 
was going on around her. She saw that the least she could do 
was to conform for the moment to the order of things, and 
accept the consequences with resignation. 

“This is my niece," said the count, introducing Sonia, “I 
do not think you know her.” 

She turned and embraced Sonia, trying to smother the impulse 
of instinctive hostility that she felt at seeing her. All these 
commonplace civilities, lasting so much too long for her im- 
patience, made a most painful impression on her, which was 
enhanced by the want of harmony between her own feelings 
and those of all these people. 

* Where is he?” she asked, once more addressing the circle 
generally. 

“He is downstairs. Natacha is with him,” said Sonia, 
colouring. ''You are tired I daresay, princess?” 

Tears of impatience filled Princess Maria's eyes; she turned 
away and was on the point of asking the countess in so many 
words to take her to her brother, when a light step was heard 
outside. It was Natacha—that Natacha to whom she had 
taken such a dislike on the occasion of their former meeting; 
but a glance was enough to assure her that here, at any rate, 
was one who could feel with her entirely, and who truly shared 
her sorrow. She hastened to meet her, threw her arms round 
her, and burst into sobs on her shoulder. 

When Natacha, who was sitting with Prince Andrew, had 
been informed of the princess's arrival, she had quietly left the 
room to run to meet her. Her agitated face expressed only 
unbounded affection for her, for him, for all who were near and 
dear to the man she loved, great pity for everyone else, and 
an intense desire to sacrifice herself wholly for those who were 
suffering. The mere selfish hope of joining her life to that of 


215 


WAR AND PEACE 


Prince Andrew had ceased to exist in her heart, and Princess 
Maria’s subtle instinct detected this at the first glance: this 
discovery mitigated the bitterness of her tears. 

“Come to him, Maria,” said Natacha, leading her into 
another room. The princess raised her head and wiped her 
eyes, but she checked herself as she was about to ask a question. 
She felt that words were inadequate to formulate it or to reply 
to it, and that she could read in Natacha’s face and eyes all she 
sought to know. 

Natacha, on her part, was anxious and doubtful: ought she, 
or ought she not, to tell her what she knew? How could she 
hide the truth from those clear eyes which seemed to see to the 
very bottom of her soul—eyes which could not be deceived? 
Her lips quivered, and bursting into loud sobs, she hid her face 
in her hands. Maria understood. However, she could not. 
resign all hope. She asked in what state the wound was, and 
how long his general condition had been so much worse. 

“You—you will see," said Natacha, through her tears. 

"When did this come on?” asked Princess Maria. And 
Natacha told her how, from the first, the fever and pain had 
made a fatal issue seem inevitable; how they had diminished, 
but the doctor had then feared gangrene; how that, too, had 
been averted; then, on their arrival at Yaroslaw, the wound 
had begun to suppurate, and the doctor had hoped that it was 
healing in the regular course, but presently there had been fever 
again, though not to an alarming degree. 

“At last, these two days,” said Natacha, swallowing her sobs. 
“Tt came on suddenly—a change—I do not know why—you 
will see for yourself.” 

“Is he very weak? Is he much thinner?” 

“No, nothing of that kind, much worse. You will see. 
Maria, he is too good, much too good, for this world; he cannot 
live—and then .. .” 


CHAPTER LXX 


WnEN Natacha opened the door for Maria to go in first, the 
princess felt that, in spite of her utmost efforts, she would 
not have the strength to control herself and see her brother 
without shedding tears. She knew full well what “it” was 
that had come over him these two days. She understood that 
this sweetness of humility and tenderness could only be the 


216 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


precursor of death. In fancy she saw the face of her little 
Andrew as she had seen it in their childhood, with the gentle, 
loving look that touched her so deeply when she had seen it 
once more years after; she expected him to receive her with 
loving and agitated words, such as her father had spoken on 
his death-bed, and felt that she must melt into tears in spite 
of herself. However, it must come to that sooner or later, so 
she resolutely went forward. 

Lying on a wide sofa, on a heap of pillows, wrapped in a 
dressing-gown trimmed with grey squirrel, very thin, very 
white, with a handkerchief in one transparent hand, while 
with the other he smoothed his long silky moustache, Prince 
Andrew looked at the two women as they came in. Princess 
Maria instinctively trod more slowly. As she saw the;expression 
in her brother’s face and eyes her sobs ceased, her tears did not 
flow—she felt frightened, like a culprit. “Am I guilty?” she 
asked herself. ‘‘Yes, for you have life and a future before 
you . . ." answered Prince Andrew's absent, severe eyes; and 
that deep gaze, sunk as it seemed in self-contemplation, had 
something hostile in it as he slowly turned it on them. 

*Maria, how are you? How did you get here?" he asked, 
as he kissed her; and his voice, like his gaze, did not seem to 
belong to him. A scream of despair would have alarmed his 
sister less than that voice. 

*Have you brought the child?" he asked gently, with a 
visible effort of memory. 

* And how do you feel now?" asked Maria, wondering at 
finding she could say anything. 

“You must ask the doctor, my dear;” then, trying to say 
something kind, he added, speaking in a mechanical way, 
“Thank you, dear, for having come." 

His sister pressed his hand, but the pressure made him frown, 
though very slightly. He said no more, and she could find no 
words. In his speech, in his voice, above all in his eyes, she 
rcad all too plainly that detachment from life, which is so terrible 
to see in those who are dying, especially when we ourselves are 
in health and vigour. He cared no more for it, not because 
he did not understand it, but because his soul was sinking into 
the depths of an unknown world, out of the ken of the living, 
and which parted him from them. 

“What a strange fate has brought us together again!" he 
said presently, breaking the silence and looking at Natacha. 
* She has nursed me, as you see." 


217 


WAR CAND PEACE 


Princess Maria listened in amazement. How could her 
brother, who was so fastidiously refined in matters of feeling, 
speak thus in the presence of the woman he loved, and who 
loved him? If he could have dreamed of coming back to life 
again he would never have spoken with this torturing calmness. 
The only possible explanation was that he was indifferent to 
every consideration, because something else—something supreme 
~—was being borne in upon him. The conversation was strained 
and painful, and became fragmentary. 

"Maria came through Riazan,” said Natacha. Prince 
Andrew was not surprised to hear her speak of his sister by 
her Christian name alone; indeed Natacha herself perceived for 
the first time that she had done so. 

“Yes?” he said. 

"She was told that Moscow is burnt—burnt to the ground; 
and that...” But she stopped, seeing that he was making 
vain efforts to listen. 

“Yes, so they say,” he murmured, “it is very sad,” and 
gazing into vacancy, he pulled his moustache. 

“And you, Maria, met Count Nicholas?” he said suddenly. 
“He wrote home that he had been greatly charmed with you," 
he went on, quite lucidly, but hardly realising the force of the 
phrase to those who were living the life of every day. “If you 
like him, too, that would do very well—you might marry 
him!" he added somewhat quicker, as if glad of words for which 
he had vainly sought and found at last. And Maria, as she 
heard, understood how far away indeed he must be from this 
nether world. 

“Why talk of me?" she said very composedly, and she 
looked at Natacha, who did not raise her eyes. Again there 
was silence. 

“Andrew,” said his sister, after a pause, “would you—vwill 
you see your boy? He has asked for you incessantly.” The 
faintest smile parted Prince Andrew’s lips; Maria, who knew 
so well every shade of expression on his face, saw with alarm 
that it was not a smile of gladness, or affection—that it was 
ironical at the idea of her trying this last means of reviving the 
emotions which were dying by degrees, as he was dying. 

“Yes, I shall be very glad to see him. Is he quite well?” 


The little boy was brought in. He was terrified at the sight 


of his father, who kissed him, and he did not know what to 
say; but he did not cry, because no one else in the room cried. 


218 


THE FRENCH VAT MOSCOW 


When he had left the room, Princess Maria bent over her 
brother, and unable to control herself any longer, melted into 
tears. Prince Andrew looked at her steadily: 

“You are crying for him," he said. She nodded her head. 
"Maria, you know that the Gosp. . ." and suddenly became 
silent. 

“What’s that you say?” 

“Nothing. But you must not cry here," he said, looking 
at her with the same cold severe look. 

He understood that his sister would bewail the fate which 
would leave his child an orphan, and he even tried to see it in 
that light. 

“Yes, it must seem very sad to her—and yet it is so simple,” 
said he to himself. “The fowls of the air sow not, neither do 
they reap; yet your heavenly Father feedeth them." He 
thought he would quote the verse to his sister. “No, it is 
useless," he reflected, “she would take it differently. The 
living cannot understand that all these feelings that are so 
dear to them—all these thoughts which seem so important, 
really do not matter. No, we have ceased to meet on common 
ground." And he said no more. 


Little Prince Nicholas was seven years old; he knew nothing 
yet, hardly his letters; but if he had been a man grown and 
in full possession of all his faculties, he could not have under- 
stood more clearly or felt more deeply the significance of the 
scene he had just witnessed between his father, his-aunt, and 
Natacha. It was Natacha who led him away. He went with 
her without a word, and creeping up to her looked in her face 
with his large, shy, thoughtful eyes, and leaned his head on her 
breast; his short, rosy lips trembled and curled, and he cried 
noiselessly. 

From that day he kept out of the way of Dessalles and of 
the countess, who loaded him with care and kindness; he 
preferred to be alone, or to stay with his aunt or Natacha, to 
whom he was devoted ; and he would throw his arms round 
them and caress them 1 in silence. 

Princess Maria left her brother's room quite hopeless; she 
never again spoke to Natacha of his possible recovery. They 
took it in turns to sit with him; Princess Maria did not weep, 
but she prayed fervently to the Infinite and Inscrutable Being, 
whose presence is so near to the pillow of the dying. 


219 


WAR AND PEACE 


CHAPTER LXXI 


PRINCE ANDREW knew that this was death—that he was half- 
dead already—by his conscious detachment from all earthly 
interests, and by the strange and radiant beatitude that filled 
his soul. He lay waiting for the inevitable, without impatience 
or trepidation. That great, ominous and eternal fact, unknown 
and far away, which all his life long had dwelt in the back- 
ground of his thoughts, was near now, close at hand; he could 
feel it—almost touch it. 

Formerly he had dreaded death. Twice had he passed 
through the fearful gulf of death in agonies, once when his 
eyes, that had been gazing on the beauty of the woods, the 
meadows, the deep-blue sky, saw it rushing at him in the 
spinning, rushing shell. When he first came to himself in the 
hospital tent, that flower of heavenly love had blossomed in 
his soul, freed for a while from the burthen of living; and thus 
delivered from the cares of earth, all fear of death had vanished. 
The more he allowed himself to dwell on the mysterious future 
which opened before him, the more he unconsciously lost hold 
on all that lay near him, and the barrier between life and death, 
which has no terrors, but in the absence of love, gradually 
gave way. In what is the meaning of loving all mankind, and 
of self-devotion through love, unless it is loving no one in 
particular, and living a divine and spiritual life? 

He looked forward to the end with real indifference: “So 
much the better!” thought he. 

But after that night of delirious visions when the woman his 
heart craved for had come to him, when her lips and tears had 
touched his hand, the love of woman had revived in him and 
renewed the ties which bound him to life. Confused thoughts 
of gladness had crowded on him; he had remembered the 
moment when he had seen Kouraguine by his side and he felt 
that he could not again feel towards him as he had then felt. 
He was tormented by a delirious wish to know whether he still 
were alive, but could not make up his mind to inquire. 

His case had followed the normal course, and the change 
that had come over him in the last two days, as Natacha had 
told Maria, was the closing struggle between life and death. 
Death was the stronger, and the renewal of his love for Natacha 
was more than an involuntary confession of how precious 
life was to him, a last revolt of the flesh against the horrors of 
the unknown. 


220 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


One evening he had been dozing, and was slightly excited, 
as he usually was at nightfall, by an increase of fever which 
lent extreme acuteness to his senses. Sonia was sitting at the 
table. He dozed. .Suddenly he became conscious of a glow 
of beatific gladness. 

“ Ah!” thought he, “she has come into the room!” 

It was, in fact, Natacha who had stolen in to take Sonia's 
seat, and he was instinctively aware of her presence. She sat 
back in an arm-chair, and her head screened her candle from 
his eyes; she was diligently knitting a stocking, begun one day 
when Prince Andrew had said no one made such a good nurse 
as an old woman knitting. The monotonous movement 
produced, he said, a soothing effect on the patient's nerves. 
The young girls nimble fingers worked fast with the long 
needles, and he studied the pensive profile of her bent head. 
Suddenly her ball of wool slipped and rolled away. Natacha 
started, stole a look at the invalid, and putting up her hand to 
keep the light out of his eyes, stooped, picked up the ball, and 
returned to her former position. He watched her, but did 
not stir; he saw her bosom rise and fall while she noiselessly 
tried to recover her breath. During the early days of their 
reunion he had owned to her that if he were restored to life he 
would everlastingly thank God for the wound that had brought 
them together again; but he had never spoken of that since. 

*Can it possibly be so now?" thought he, as he listened to 
the slight noise of the needles. “Why should Heaven have 
allowed us to meet once more if only that I should die? Has 
the one truth of life been revealed to me only that I should be 
left in a lie? I love her more than the whole world, and can 
I help loving her?" And he groaned deeply, a habit he had 
fallen into during his long hours of suffering. 

As she heard him Natacha laid her work on the table and 
leaned over to look at him. Seeing the glitter of his eyes she 
spoke: “You are not asleep then!” 

*No, I have been watching you for a long time; I felt you 
come in. No one but you brings me that sweet calm—that 
radiance. I could almost cry for happiness!" 

Natacha went nearer, and his face flushed with passion and 
gladness. 

*Natacha, I love you too much; I love you more than all 
the world." 

* And I " she looked away an instant. ‘‘Why too 
much?" she asked. 


221 


WAR AND PEACE 


"Why too much? Tell me, from the bottom of your heart, 
what you think: Shall I live?” 

“I am sure of it—sure of it!” cried Natacha, seizing his 
hands with growing excitement. He did not reply. 

"How good that would be!" he sighed, and he kissed her 
hand. 

Natacha was happy; but she remembered that too much 
excitement might be fatal: 

“You have not slept," said she, composing herself. ‘You 
must try to sleep; I entreat you." 

He pressed her hand once more and she went back to her 
place. Twice she glanced round, and meeting his eye each 
time she concentrated her attention on her knitting so as not 
tolook up again. Presently he fell asleep. Not for long, how- 
ever. He woke in a cold sweat. His mind was beginning to 
hover between life and death. 

"Love——" he thought again. “What is love? It is the 
negation of death, it is life itself. All that I understand at all 
I understand by love alone. It includes everything. Love is 
God, and death is the re-absorption of an atom of love—that is 
myself—by the universal and eternal source of love.” And 
these dreams brought him comfort; but they were no more 
than dreams that strayed through his brain, without leaving 
even a shadow of reality; and he fell asleep again, still torn by 
a myriad of confused and exciting fancies. 

He dreamed that he was in bed in the room where he now 
was, but in recovered health. A long line of unknown persons 
passed before him. He was talking with them, and discussing 
various subjects, and thinking of following them he knew not 
whither, saying to himself all the while that he was wasting 
time in trifles when he had far more serious matters to attend 
to; and still he lingered, talking and amazing them by his 
brilliant quotations, which nevertheless had no sense. By 
degrees these forms vanished, and his whole attention became 
concentrated on the closed door. Can he lock it quickly 
enough? All depends on that. He rises and goes towards it 
to shoot the bolt, but his legs give way under him: he feels 
that he must be too late. Gathering all his strength into a 
final effort he is about to rush forward when a fearful anguish 
freezes his soul—anguish that is the fear of Death! It is 
Death that is there waiting at the door, and just as he drags 
himself breathless to the threshold the hideous spectre pushes 
it open and looks in, That nameless creature is Death,— 


222 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


Death is marching down upon him; he must fly, come what 
may, he must escape. He clutches at the door, he can no 
í longer close it, but by putting forth all his remaining energy 
| he may perhaps succeed in checking “Its” advance? Alas! 
| his strength fails him, he is beating the air; again the door 
| opens a little wider—again he tries to resist the fateful pressure 
from without. In vain! The spectre comes in, he is here... . ! 
And Prince Andrew died. 

But at the same moment he became conscious that he was 
asleep, and with a great effort he woke.... “Yes, it was 
| certainly Death! To die and wake! Is death then an 
awakening?” 

The idea flashed on him like a lightning dream; a corner of 
the veil which still parted him from the unknown" had been 
lifted from his soul. His body was being released from the 
bonds that held it to earth, and a mysterious beatitude came 
over him which from that moment did not desert him. 

He woke bathed in chill sweat, and made a slight movement. 
Natacha came to him and asked him what he wanted. He did 
not understand her question, but looked at her with strange 
vacancy. That it was of which she had spoken to Princess 
Maria. 

From that moment the fever took a melignant course, the 
doctor said, but Natacha was not interested in what the doctor 
said; she saw these terrible, for her, more indubitable, moral 
symptoms. 


His last days and hours glided peacefully away without any 
further change in his general condition. Princess Maria and 
Natacha hardly left him for a moment, but they were fully 
aware that the sole aim of their care was the physical presence 
—the mortal hull, which would soon be no more than a dear 
and far-away memory; that his spirit was no longer of this 
world. ‘Their feelings were so intense and deep that the terr'ble 
advent of death took no hold on their minds. It was useless 
to indulge their grief, so they did not weep, neither when sitting 
by him nor when out of the room, and as words were empty and 
inadequate to express it, they ceased even to speak about him. 
They saw him sinking slowly, calmly into the unseen; and 
both felt it was inevitable, and that it was well. 

He confessed and received the Sacrament and bade them all 
farewell. When his little son was brought to him he kissed his 
cheek and turned away, not out of any regret at dying, but 


225 


WAR AND PEACE 


because he supposed that nothing more was expected of him. 
When they begged him to give his child his blessing he did so, 
and then looked round inquiringly as if to ask whether there 
was anything more for him to do; and he breathed his last 
supported by his sister and Natacha. 

“It is over!” said Maria a few minutes later. 

Natacha bent down, looked into the dead eyes and closed 
them. 

“Where is he now?” she wondered to herself. 

When he had been laid in his coffin all the household came 
in to see the last of him. The child was startled with painful 
surprise; everyone cried: the countess and Sonia for Natacha 
and for him who was gone; the old count for himself—foreseeing 
that he, too, ere long must cross the same bourne. Natacha 
and Princess Maria wept too; not for their own grief, but 
under an influence which made their hearts overflow—the 
sight of the solemn, simple mystery of Death! 


224 


BOOK FOURTEEN 


CHAPTER LXXII 


Tue correlation of causes is a thing incomprehensible by the 
human mind, but the desire to comprehend them is born with 
it. Hence those who cannot discern the logic of events jump 
at the first coincidence that strikes them and exclaim: “This 
is the cause." 

In historical events where the objects of observation are the 
actions of people, the first cause to which results are ascribed 
is the will of the gods; later it is the will of those individuals 
who are most in view, ie. the heroes of history. But one has 
only to look deeper into the event (i.e. into the actions of all 
those taking part in an historical event) to see that not only 
does the will of the hero not direct it, but on the contrary, is 
itself directed. It would seem as if the understanding of an 
historical event this way or that was a matter of no moment. 
But between the man who says that the people of the west 
moved eastwards because Napoleon so willed it and him who 
says that it happened so because it had to, is the same difference 
as between those who declared the earth to be fixed and the 
planets moved round it, and those who claimed that, although 
not knowing what supported the earth they nevertheless knew 
that certain laws governed its movements as well as those of 
the planets. Though historical events have in fact no other 
cause than the primal cause, they are nevertheless governed 
by laws which are unknown to us, or which we can hardly 
detect, and which we can never discover until we give up all 
idea of finding behind them the will of any individual man. 
Thus a knowledge of the law by which the planets move only 
became possible when men had given up the notion of the 
fixity of the earth. 


After the battle of Borodino and the evacuation and burning 


of Moscow, the most important episode of the war of 1812, in 
the opinion of historians, was the march of the Russian army 


25 


WAR AND PEACE 


when it left the road to Riazan to proceed towards Kalouga 
and establish itself in the camp at Taroutino. They attribute 
this heroic feat to various individuals, and even the French, 
when speaking of this flank movement, praise the genius dis- 
played by the Russian chiefs at this juncture. We, however, 
fail to discover, as these historians have done, any deep-laid 
scheme, evolved by a single brain, to save Russia and ruin 
Napoleon, or to see in it the faintest trace of military genius. 
For no stupendous intelligence is needed to perceive that the 
best position for an army which is not to fight is in a spot 
where it can ensure supplies. The veriest child might have 
guessed, in 1812, that the road to Kalouga offered the greatest 
advantages after the retreat of the army. By what chain of 
argument have these gentlemen discovered that this manceuvre 
was such a brilliant scheme? Where do they find that its 
direct outcome was the salvation of Russia and the destruction 
of the enemy? In point of fact, to argue from the circum- 
stances which preceded it, which were coincident with it, and 
which followed it, this flank march might have been the ruin of 
the Russians and the saving of the French ; and it is by no 
means clear that it had a favourable result on the situation of 
the army. 

But for the co-operation of other circumstances it could have 
come to no good issue. What would have happened if Moscow 
had not been burnt, if Murat had not lost sight of the Russian 
troops, if Napoleon had not sat down in inaction, if the Russian 
army had forced a battle on quitting Moscow—as Bennigsen 
and Barclay advised, if Napoleon had marched on Taroutino 
and attacked the Russians with one-tenth of the energy he 
displayed at Smolensk, if the French had gone on to St. Peters- 
burg? etc. etc. Under any of these conditions safety would 
have turned to disaster. How is it that those who study 
history have shut their eyes and ascribed this movement to the 
decision of some one man? No one had prepared and schemed 
for this manceuvre beforehand ; and at the moment when it was 
carried out it was simply the inevitable result of circumstances, 
and its consequences could not be seen until it had gone into 
the realm of the past. 

At the council held at Fili the Russian commanders generally 
were in favour of a retreat in a straight line along the road to 
Nijni-Novgorod. Ample evidence of this fact exists in the 
numerous votes given in favour of this course, and more 
especially in the conversation which took place after the council 


226 


The French retreat 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


between the commander-in-chief and Lanskoi, the head of the 
commissariat. Lanskoi announced in his report that the 
victuals for the troops were, for the most part, collected along 
the line of the Oka, in the governments of Toula and Kazan; 
consequently, in case of a retreat on Nijni the transport of 
provisions would be intercepted by the river, over which they 
could not be carried when the winter had once begun. This 
was the first consideration which led to the abandonment of the 
original, and, on the whole, the more natural plan. Thus the 
army was kept within reach of supplies. Then, again, the 
inaction of the French—who had lost all track of the Russians, 
the need for protecting and defending the manufactories of 
arms, above all of keeping within reach of food, drove the army 
southwards. 

After getting out on the Toula road by a desperate move, the 
generals intended to stop at Podolsk; but the sudden appear- 
ance of some French troops, with other circumstances—among 
them the abundance of victuals at Kalouga—led them to 
proceed still further to the south and to get off the Toula on to 
the Kalouga road, marching towards Taroutino. Just as it is 
impossible to specify the precise moment when the desertion 
of Moscow was decided on, so it is impossible to say exactly 
when the march on Taroutino was a settled thing; and yet 
everyone believed himself to have gone there in virtue of the 
decision of the generals in command. 


CHAPTER LXXIII 


THE route thus taken was so self-evidently that which the 
army must follow that even the pillager’s straggled in this 
direction, and that Koutouzow incurred the czar's censure for 
having led the army in the first instance towards Riazan instead 
of setting out at once for Taroutino. Alexander himself had 
suggested this movement in a letter which the commander-in- 
chief did not receive till after his arrival there. 

In fact, Koutouzow's skill at this juncture lay, not in a stroke 
of genius, but in a competent apprehension of the accomplished 
facts. He alone fully appreciated the inaction of the French; 
he alone understood and maintained that Borodino had been 
a victory for the Russians; he alone—though as commander- 
in-chief he seemed called upon to take the offensive—did all he 


221 


WAR AND PEACE 


could, on the contrary, to prevent an unnecessary waste of 
strength in futile struggles. The Wild Beast had in truth been 
mortally hurt at Borodino, and was still lying where the hunter 
had left it. Was it past fighting? Was it still alive even? 
The hunter knew not. But suddenly it gave a cry which 
betrayed its hopeless plight; this cry was the letter brought by 
Lauriston to Koutouzow in his camp. Napoleon, no less 
convinced than ever of his own incapacity of doing wrong, wrote 
as follows under a sudden impulse: 


To Prince Koutouzow. 

"I am sending one of my aides-de-camp general to discuss 
various points of interest with you. I beg your highness to 
believe all he will tell you; more particularly when he shall 
express to you all the sentiments of esteem and high respect 
which I have long felt for your highness. This note having 
no other object, I pray the Almighty to have your highness in 
his holy and gracious keeping." 

(Signed) NAPOLEON. 

Moscow, October 30th. 


“T shall incur the curses of posterity if I am regarded as the 
first to take any steps towards a compromise in any form. 
That is the spirit which at this moment rules the nation," 
replied Koutouzow; and he continued to do all in his power to 
direct the retreat of the army. 

After a month thus spent in pillage by the French troops, 
and in rest by the Russians, a great change had come over the 
temper of the two belligerent forces; entirely to the advantage 
of the Russians. Although the state of the French army and 
its number were unknown to the Russians, as soon as the 
relative strength of the two armies had undergone a change, 
the necessity of an offensive showed itself in a countless number 
of symptoms. Such symptoms were the arrival of Lauriston ; 
the abundance of food at Taroutino; the information received 
from all sides of the inaction and disorder of the French; the 
filling up of our reserves; the fine weather etc. etc. This long 
inaction had awakened their impatience and curiosity to know 
what had become of the French, whom for so many weeks they 
had lost sight of. The audacious courage of the Russian 
outposts, who skirmished within reach of them day after day, 
the reports of small guerilla victories and peasant raids, revived 
the desire and hope of vengeance which had lurked in every 
soul during the stay of the foe at Moscow; every soldier felt 


228 


| 
| 


The inaction and disorder of the French 


l 4 them day al 
he m B dr chutes «nd peasant faidi, feet 
pw he a i l Ae which hed Inrked ip r 
S v ote Muscat uery widier belt < 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


instinctively that the balance of the opposing forces was no 
longer the same, and that the superiority was now on the 
Russian side. Just as the chimes of a clock start to play their 
tune when the hand has made a round of the dial, so the reflex 
effect of this general feeling was immediately perceptible in 
increased activity in the higher circles. 


CHAPTER LXXIV 


Tue Russian army was commanded on the spot by Koutouzow 
and his staff, and directed from St. Petersburg by the czar 
himself. 

Before the news of the evacuation of Moscow had reached 
his majesty a detailed scheme of the whole campaign had been 
sent to Koutouzow to make matters easy for him; and the 
staff accepted this plan in spite of the changed circumstances. 
Koutouzow himself would only say that plans laid down at a 
distance were always difficult to carry out. Messengers were 
continually coming to him with new instructions, to solve the 
difficulties as they arose, and to report subsequently on his 
acts and deeds. 

Some important changes had taken place in the command of 
the divisions; substitutes had to be found for Bagration, who 
was killed, and for Barclay, who had withdrawn in dudgeon at 
being placed in a secondary position. It became a' matter of 
anxious discussion whether it were better to put A. in D.’s 
place or D. in A.'s, and so on; as though, in a case of this kind, 
anything could be gained by it except the pleasure of A. or D. 

In consequence of the existing hostility between Koutouzow 
and his chief of staff, Bennigsen, of the presence of the czar's 
various confidential envoys, and of the changes which had 
become inevitable, a far more complicated game was being 
played at the headquarters of the army. The leaders thought 
only of thwarting each other, and the object of all these 
intrigues was the conduct of the military situation which they 
all believed they were controlling, while, in fact, it was taking 
its course quite irrespective of their influence, and being the 
simple outcome of the mutual reaction of masses of men on 
each other. However, this tangle of combinations in high and 
powerful spheres was an index of what must inevitably ensue. 

On the 2nd (14th) of October, the czar wrote a letter which 


229 


WAR AND PEACE 


did not reach Koutouzow till after the battle of Taroutino, as 
follows: 


“Prince Michael Ilarionovitch: 


“Moscow has been in the hands of the enemy since the 2nd 
(14th) of September. Your latest report is dated the 2oth 
(October 2nd), and since then you have not only taken no steps 
against the enemy to rescue our principal capital, but you have 
retreated still further. A detachment of French troops now 
holds Serpoukhow; and Toula, so important to the army as 
the headquarters of the manufacture of arms, is in danger. I 
see by Wintzingerode's despatches that the enemy is marching 
a body of 10,000 men towards the road to St. Petersburg; 
another of several thousand is advancing towards Dmitrow; a- 
third occupies the road to Vladimir, and a fourth is concen- 
trated between Rouza and Mojaisk. Napoleon himself was 
still at Moscow with his regiments of Guards on the 25th (October 
7th). Now that his troops are thus divided into detachments, 
is it conceivable that you have in front of you a sufficiently 
numerous body of the enemy to prevent your acting on the 
offensive? It is to be presumed, on the contrary, that you are 
being followed up by small parties, or, at any rate, by a smaller 
body than the army entrusted to your command. It would 
seem that you might have taken advantage of these arrange- 
ments to attack an enemy weaker than yourself and destroy 
him, or at any rate force him backwards so as to rescue the 
larger portion of the governments at present held by the foe, 
and thus protect the town of Toula and the other towns in the 
interior. If the enemy is strong enough to send forward a con- 
siderable mass of troops towards St. Petersburg, while it is to 
a certain extent weakly defended, the responsibility rests with 
you; for if you had acted with energy and decision, you ought 
to have been able, with the forces at your command, to preserve 
us from this new misfortune. Do not forget that you have 
yet to account to your indignant country for the loss of Moscow. 
You know by experience that I have always been ready to 
reward you, and I am so still; but I and Russia are entitled to 
expect entire devotion from you, unwavering firmness, and the 
success which we have a right to hope for from your acumen, 
your military talents, and the bravery of the troops you 
command." 


By the time this note reached Koutouzow, the battle was 


230 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


fought; he had found it impossible to withhold the army any 
longer from taking the offensive. 

On the 2nd (14th) October, a Cossack named Schapovalow, 
beating about in the open country, killed a hare and wounded 
another; in following up the game he let himself be led on into 
the depths of a forest, and came unexpectedly on the left wing 
of Murat’s division, who were off their guard. He told the 
story as a good joke to his comrades, and the ensign, hearing 
of it, reported it to his superiors. The Cossack was sent for, 
and questioned; the officers in command determined to take 
advantage of this lucky windfall to carry off the enemy’s horses, 
and one of them, who was known to the higher authorities, 
mentioned the fact to a general on the staff. At that moment 
the tension of feeling happened to be at its height. Yermolow 
had arrived a few days previously, and had entreated Ben- 
nigsen to exert all his influence on the commander-in-chief to 
induce him to decide on an attack. 

“Tf I did not know you well,” replied Bennigsen, “I should 
have concluded that you wished the very reverse of what you 
say, for if I advise a step, that is quite enough to make his 
highness do just the contrary." 

The Cossack’s story was confirmed, however, by other scouts, 
and it was clear that everything was ready for a crisis. The 
springs unbent, the wheels creaked, and the chimes struck. 
Under the pressure arising from the report sent to the czar by 
Bennigsen, from the wish of all the other commanders which 
his majesty was said to share, and from the accounts given by 
the Cossacks, Koutouzow, in spite of his supposed influence, his 
wisdom and experience, found himself unable to control the 
movement. So he gave orders for what he believed to be 
useless, if not mischievous, and signed his assent to what was 
already un fait accompli. 


CHAPTER LXXV 


THE attack was to take place on the sth (17th) October. 
On the day before, Koutouzow signed the order for moving the 
troops. Toll read the document to Yermolow, and proposed to 
him to settle the arrangements to be made. 

“Yes, very good," said Yermolow, “but I have not time 
just now." 

The plan of battle as concocted by Toll was a capital one, 


231 


WAR AND PEACE 


As in the battle of Austerlitz it was explicitly stated, though 
not in German: “The first column will march this way, the 
second will march that way, etc. etc." These columns, as set 
forth on paper, were to combine at a given moment, to fall on 
the enemy, and crush him. Everything was foreseen and 
provided for, as it always is in a written plan of action; but, as 
also always happens, not one of the columns reached its position 
in time. 

When several copies of this plan were ready, they were given 
to an orderly officer of Koutouzow's to carry to Yermolow. 
The young guardsman, extremely proud of so important an 
errand, went to Yermolow's lodgings. They were empty. 

“The general is gone,” said a servant. The envoy rode off 
to find a general, who was in constant communication with 
Yermolow: “‘No one at home,” he was told. 

To another: the same reply. 

"I only hope I shall not be called to account for the delay,” 
thought he. “What devilish bad luck 

He rode all around the camp. Some told him that Yermolow 
had just gone on with a party of generals; others said he had 
just come back. The hapless youth sought him till six in the 
evening, not giving himself time even to eat. Yermolow was 
not to be found, and no one knew whither he had gone. The 
envoy, having taken some refreshment at a fellow-officer’s 
rooms, went forward to Miloradovitch’s quarters with the 
advanced guard. Here he was told, he was probably at a ball 
which General Kikine was giving, and Yermolow might also be 
there. 

“ Where on earth is this ball?” 

“Over there, at Jechkine,” said a Cossack officer, pointing 
to the roof of a large country-house in the distance. 

"Out there? Why, that is beyond the line of the advanced 
posts!” 

“Two of our regiments have been placed on the very line. 
They are making merry up there this evening. Two regimental 
bands and three of chorus-singers !" - 

The messenger crossed the line. As he went towards the 
house, he could hear the jovial songs of the soldiers’ chorus, 
almost drowned in the eager voices of the company. The 
young officer could not help falling into the spirit of the thing, 
though he was afraid he should be held guilty of the delay in 
delivering the important message, of which he was the bearer. 
It was already nine o’clock; he dismounted and went up the 


232 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


steps of a handsome house, standing midway between the 
French and Russian lines, and which had remained unhurt. 
In the anteroom and offices he met servants carrying wine and 
dishes. The singers were placed outside, close to the windows. 

As soon as he entered the drawing-room, he saw that all the 
principal generals of the Russian army were assembled there, 
and among them the tall and stately figure of Yermolow. They 
were standing in a semicircle, their uniforms unbuttoned, and 
their faces flushed, roaring with laughter, while in the centre of 
the room a remarkably handsome man of middle height was 
lightly dancing the “trepak.” 

“Ha ha! Bravo, Nicholas Ivanovitch! Bravo 

The messenger felt himself more in the wrong than ever, for 
coming at such a moment with an important letter; he wished 
to wait, indeed, but he was at once observed. One of the 
bystanders pointed him out to Yermolow, and he, knitting his 
brows, advanced to meet him, listened to his story, and took 
the paper without saying a word. 

“You fancy that he is here by chance,” said a comrade on 
the staff to Koutouzow’s messenger, speaking of Yermolow. 
“Not a bit of it, my dear boy; it is just a trick he wants to 
play on Konovnitzine, you will see to-morrow what a mess 
there will be!” 


1? 


CHAPTER LXXVI 


Next day old Koutouzow, having been called very early, said 
his prayers and dressed, and then got into his chariot with the 
disagreeable feeling that he had now to direct a battle to be 
fought against his will. He took the road to Létachevka, at 
about five versts behind Taroutino, the spot fixed upon for the 
rendezvous of all the corps. As he went he dozed, and then 
woke, listening to ascertain whether firing had yet begun. An 
autumn morning, damp and grey, was just beginning to dawn 
in the east. As he got near to Taroutino he met some cavalry- 
men leading their horses to water; he stopped the carriage and 
asked to what regiment they belonged: it was one that ought 
long since to have occupied a post in ambush. “Well, perhaps 
it is some mistake," thought he; but a little further on he saw 
some infantry, their muskets piled, calmly eating their broth. 
He called the officer, who told him that no orders of any kind 
had reached him. 


295 


WAR AND PEACE 


“What!” Koutouzow began; but he checked himself, and 
sent for the colonel. 

Meanwhile he got out of his carriage and walked up and 
down, his head drooping, and breathing hard. When General 
Eichen arrived, Koutouzow turned purple with anger, not that 
Eichen was the guilty man, but he at any rate was someone on 
whom he could vent his anger. Panting and trembling with 
rage, in a perfect paroxysm of fury, he rushed at Eichen, 
threatening him with his fists and loading him with the coarsest 
abuse. A captain named Brozine came in for a share of it, 
though he was there only by accident and was entirely innocent. 

“And who is this scoundrel? let the wretch be shot!" cried 
Koutouzow in a hoarse voice, and gesticulating like a maniac. 
What, was he, the commander-in-chief, who was wont to be 
told that never before had anyone enjoyed such unlimited 
power, was he to be made the laughing-stock of his army? 
Was he to have prayed, to have thought, to have planned, 
through a sleepless night in vain? 

"Why, when I was only a subaltern no one would have 
dared to mock me so,” thought he, “and now... .” 

He felt an actual physical pain as if under corporal punish- 
ment, and he could only vent it in cries of rage and anguish. 
But presently his strength was spent: he grew calm, and under- 
standing that he had been to blame in giving way to such 
violence, got into his carriage again and drove on in silence. 

His fury was spent; he listened passively to the excuses and 
entreaties of Bennigsen, Konovnitzine, and Toll, who tried to 
persuade him of the necessity of carrying out on the morrow 
the manceuvre that had failed to-day. He was finally obliged 
to consent. As to Yermolow, he kept out of Koutouzow’s way 
for two days. 


CHAPTER LXXVII 


Next day the troops were brought together by the evening 
and set in motion during the night. The darkness was intense; 
heavy purple black clouds covered the sky, but it did not rain. 
The ground was wet, the soldiers marched on in profound 
silence: only the artillery betrayed itself by the metallic rattle 
of the gun-carriages. Talking, smoking, striking a light even, 
were forbidden; the very horses seemed to restrain themselves 


234 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


from neighing. The mystery of the thing lent it a peculiar 
charm, and the men tramped on in excellent spirits. Some of 
the columns, when they believed that they had reached their 
destination, piled their arms and stretched themselves to rest on 
the cold earth; others—in fact, the majority—marched on all 
through the night, and naturally reached a point where they 
had no business to be. 

Count Orlow-Denissow, with a small detachment of Cossacks, 
was the only man to reach the right place at the right time. 
He took up a position in a copse on the outskirts of a wood, 
and on one side of the path between the village of Dmitrovsk 
and Stromilow. 

The count had fallen asleep a little before daybreak when he 
was called to examine a French deserter. He proved to be a 
Polish non-commissioned officer of Poniatowsky’s corps; he said 
he had deserted because he had been passed over, that he ought 
long since to have received his commission, that he was the 
bravest man of them all, and meant to be revenged. He 
assured them that Murat had spent the night within a verst 
of the Russians, and that if they would give him a company 
of a hundred men he would pledge himself to take him 
prisoner. 

Count Orlow held council with his fellow-officers. The 
proposal was too tempting to be refused, and they were disposed 
to make the venture. Finally, after much discussion and 
planning, Major-General Grékow decided on taking two regi- 
ments of Cossacks, and allowing the Pole to be their guide. 

"But mark my words," said the count to the deserter, “If 
you have lied I will have you hanged like a dog. If you have 
told the truth, you shall have a hundred gold pieces.” 

The Pole did not reply; he sprang into his saddle and rode 
after General Grékow with a determined air; the party dis- 
appeared in the wood. The count, shivering with the chill of 
dawn and uneasy as to the responsibility he had incurred, went 
a little way into the open to reconnoitre the enemy’s camp, 
which was just visible about a verst away in the doubtful light 
of morning and the dying camp-fires. The Russian party were 
to emerge from the wood on a slope to Count Orlow’s right; 
but he looked in vain, nothing appeared. His aide-de-camp 
thought he saw signs of waking in the French camp. 

“ Ah! it is getting late,” said he to himself. He was suddenly 
undeceived, as sometimes occurs, when the personal influence 
that has deluded us is removed—the Pole was evidently a 


235 


WAR AND PEACE 


traitor who had cheated them; the intended attack would 
come to nothing, in spite of the two regiments which Grékow 
had led God knows where! 

"How can they possibly surprise the commander-in-chief 
when he is surrounded by such a considerable force? The 
villain has lied.” 

“We can recall Grékow,” said an officer in his suite, who, 
like himself, was beginning to have his doubts. 

“What do you really think? Must we leave things as they 
are? Yes or no." 

“Send for him to come back." 

“Very good; go, someone, and bid him return. But it will 
be late, it will soon be broad day." 

An aide-de-camp disappeared in the forest in search of 
Grékow. When he had been brought back, Orlow, greatly 
excited by this change of plan and by vainly waiting for the 
infantry to come up with the enemy lying in front of him, 
made up his mind to an attack. “To horse," he said in a low 
voice. 

Every man fell into his place and crossed himself, and they 
were off. A shout rang through the wood, and the companies ! 
of Cossacks, scattering like corn shed out of a sack, rode boldly 
forward with lances poised, across the brook and down on the 
enemy's camp. 

The warning shout of the French outpost who first caught 
sight of the Cossacks set the camp astir. All the men, still half 
asleep and only half dressed, flew to the guns, to the musket- 
piles, to the horses, rushing wildly in all directions and com- 
pletely losing their heads. If the Cossacks had gone straight 
ahead, without heeding what was going on around them, they 
would infalhbly have taken Murat prisoner, as the generals 
hoped and wished; but it was impossible to keep them from 
pillaging the camp and seizing the men. No one would listen 
to orders: 1500 prisoners, 38 cannon, with flags, horses, and 
accoutrements of every kind were taken and much precious 
time was wasted in securing the men and beasts and dividing 
the spoil, with the usual concomitants of quarrelling and shout- 
ing. The French, recovering from their panic and seeing that 
they were not pursued, re-formed, and in their turn attacked 
Orlow-Denissow; he, expecting reinforcements which did not 
come up, could make no adequate defence. 

Meanwhile the infantry were behindhand. They had started 

1 Sotnia, a hundred men, under a Sotnik or centurion. 


236 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


punctually under Bennigsen and Toll, but had reached a point 
far from that which they were intended to occupy. The men, who 
had set out in good spirits, soon lost many stragglers, and the 
feeling roused by the blunder of their chiefs gave rise to much 
murmuring which increased when they were led back again. 
The aides-de-camp sent forward to repair the mischief were 
sharply reprimanded by the generals, who disputed loudly 
among themselves, till, tired of quarrelling, they simply marched 
forward without any definite end in view. “We shall come 
out somewhere," said they—-as in fact they did, but not at the 
place where they were wanted. Some, to be sure, reached their 
posts; but it was too late; they were of no use but to receive 
the enemy's fire. 

Toll, who in this engagement played the part which Weirother 
had filled at Austerlitz, galloped to and fro along the line, and 
ascertained that everything had been done in exact contraven- 
tion to orders. Thus, in the wood he met, soon after daybreak, 
Bagovouth's corps, which ought long since to have gone to the 
support of Orlow’s Cossacks. Toll, desperate and furious at 
the failure of the movement, and ascribing it to him individu- 
ally, addressed the commander in terms of insolent abuse, and 
even threatened to have him shot. Bagovouth, a placid old 
soldier, whose courage was above a shadow of suspicion, was 
exasperated by the contradictory orders he was receiving from 
all sides at once, by the unreasonable delays, and the confusion 
that prevailed; to the astonishment of all, in direct opposition 
to his usual demeanour, he gave way to a fit of rage and 
answered bluntly: 

“I will not be lectured by anyone; and I am as ready to 
die with my men as any other man, be he who he may!" 

Then, brave Bagovouth, blind with wrath, not giving himself 
time to think whether such a diversion were opportune, marched 
with his division, unsupported, straight into the line of fire. 
Danger—shell and ball, were in tune with the irritated mood: 
he was struck by one of the first shots, and a great number of 
his fine corps fell before those which followed. Thus his men 
remained for some time, exposed to the enemy's fire, without 
any useful result. 


237 


WAR AND PEACE 


CHAPTER LXXVIII 


ALL this while another column, near which Koutouzow was 
stationed, was supposed to be attacking the French. He, 
however, knew only too well that this action, fought against 
his judgment, must probably result in immense confusion; he 
therefore kept back his troops as much as possible, and would 
not allow them to quit their position. Mounted on a stout 
grey nag, he replied indolently to all the suggestions that were 
made to him to attack. 

“You insist on talking of attacking, but you see we can’t 
make complicated manceuvres,” he said to Miloradovitch, who 
begged to be allowed to march forward. “Why, you could not- 
manage to capture Murat this morning," he said to another. 
“Also, you were late, so there is an end of it." 

When he was told that the French had just been reinforced 
by two battalions of Poles, he glanced out of the corner of his 
eye at Yermolow, to whom he had not spoken a word since the 
day before. 

“That is the way," he muttered, "everyone wants to attack, 
all sorts of schemes are proposed; but when it comes to acting, 
nothing is ready, and the enemy, warned in time, takes due 
precautions!” 

Yermolow smiled; he understood that the storm had passed 
over, and that the commander-in-chief would be satisfied with 
this innuendo. 

"He is amusing himself at my expense!" said Yermolow, in 
a low tone, just touching Raievsky's knee. 

Shortly after he went up to Koutouzow, and addressed him 
respectfully: 

"Nothing is lost, highness, the enemy is still in front of us. 
Will you not give the word to attack? Otherwise the men 
will not even smell powder all day." 

Koutouzow would not answer. When he heard that Murat 
was retreating, he made up his mind to move forward, but he 
ordered a halt of three-quarters of an hour at every hundred 
yards. Thus the whole affair was reduced to Orlow-Denissow's 
charge, and the unavailing loss of some hundreds of men. 
The result to Koutouzow was an order in diamonds, and to 
Bennigsen a hundred thousand roubles, besides the diamonds, 
handsome rewards to the superior officers, and promotions and 
staff appointments without number. 


238 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


“That is always the way—things are always managed hind 
part before,” said the Russian military authorities, after the 
battle of Taroutino, just as they do to this day; and they hinted 
that, then and there, some idiot had intervened to do some 
particularly stupid thing, which they, severally, never would 
have thought of doing. 

But men who talk like this, either have no clear idea of the 
engagement they are discussing, or else they consciously mis- 
apprehend it. No battle, whether Taroutino, Borodino, or 
Austerlitz, was ever fought in exact accordance with the calcu- 
lations of those who direct the operations. That is an essential 
condition. Manis under no circumstances so nearly independent 
as he is when the next step is for life or death; and an infinite 
number of such independent forces influence the course of a 
battle; a course which can never be foreseen, and can never 
coincide with that which it would take under the impulsion ot 
a single force. When historians, especially French historians, 
assert, that their wars and battles have been worked out on a 
preconceived plan, in which every movement was laid down 
beforehand, the only conclusion we can arrive at is that their 
accounts are inaccurate. 

It is evident that the battle of Taroutino did not end as 
Count Toll had intended; that is to say, in the advance of the 
Russian troops under fire in regular order; nor as Count Orlow 
had proposed, in the capture of Murat; nor as Bennigsen 
desired, since he meant to destroy the enemy; nor as the 
officer hoped, who dreamed of distinguishing himself; or the 
Cossack, greedy of yet more booty. But if the object aimed 
at was the accomplishment of the universal desire of the country, 
to drive out the French, and strike a mortal blow at their 
strength, the battle of Taroutino was certainly and evidently 
most needful and opportune at this stage of the campaign, since 
it achieved that end. 

It is difficult—nay impossible—to imagine a more favour- 
able turn of affairs than that which resulted from this action. 
Notwithstanding the almost unexampled muddle, very great 
advantages were gained, at the cost of small effort and 
insignificant losses. The weakness of the French was clearly 
proved, and the enemy received a shock which, under existing 
conditions, compelled them to begin a retreat. 


259 


WAR AND PEACE 


CHAPTER LXXIX 


NAPOLEON marches into Moscow after the splendid victory of 
Borodino (or the Moskova, as it is sometimes called)—it must 
certainly have been a victory, since his troops remained in 
possession of the field. The Russians retire and abandon 
Moscow full of stores, arms, ammunition, and incalculable 
riches. A month elapses before they resume the offensive. 
Napoleon's position is obviously brilliant and glorious in the 
highest degree. No exceptional genius is needed, it would 
seem, to enable him to throw his superior forces on the wreck 
of the enemy's army and crush it, to extort an advantageous 
peace, to march on St. Petersburg, if the Russians prove recal- 
citrant, to return to Smolensk in the event of failure, or at least 
to remain at Moscow, and to keep the advantage already won. 
Nothing can be more simple and easy than to take measures to 
secure that. Pillage must be prohibited, the army must be 
provided with warm clothing—easily procurable at Moscow, 
the distribution of food must be strictly regulated—the French 
historians themselves admit that there were provisions for six 
months. And yet Napoleon, the greatest genius ever known, 
who could—as these same historians assert—bend the army as 
he would, takes none of these precautions, but, on the contrary, 
selects the most absurd and fatal course. 

Nothing, in fact, could more surely lead to disaster than a 
stay in Moscow so late as October, allowing the army to pillage 
at will; then, to leave Moscow without any well-defined plan, 
to go within reach of Koutouzow without giving battle, to get 
as far as Malo-Yaroslavetz, leaving it on the right, and making 
for Mojaisk without trying the fortune of war once more; 
finally, to return to Smolensk, blindly wandering across a 
devastated country. Any able strategist studying tnis series of 
facts, would unhesitatingly pronounce that it could entail no 
other result than the destruction—intentional or fated—of the 
army thus governed. Still, to say that Napoleon sacrificed it 
voluntarily or by sheer incapacity is just as false as it is to say 
that he led his troops to Moscow by the vigour of his will, or 
the brilliancy of his genius. In either case his personal action 
had no more influence than that of the meanest private; it 
had to bow to certain laws, of which the outcome was the 
resultant fact. 

It is a mistake on the part of historians to suppose that 


240 


—- C U-———-«————— 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


Napoleon's intellect must have failed at Moscow, as the only 
way of accounting for his disaster. His energy at this time 
was not à whit less wonderful than it had been in Egypt, in 
Italy, in Austria, and in Prussia. We Russians cannot form a 
just opinion of what Napoleon's genius may have been in Egypt 
—where “forty centuries looked down upon his glory "—or in 
Austria or Prussia, for we must depend on French and German 
versions of the facts; and the Germans have always cried up 
his genius, finding no other way for accounting for his triumphs 
over army-corps that surrendered without striking a blow, and 
whole regiments that were taken prisoners without attempting 
to fight. 

We Russians, thank God! need not bow down before his 
genius to screen ourselves from disgrace. We paid-dearly for 
the right to judge him honestly and without subterfuge, and 
we are, therefore, not bound to any servile concessions. His 
vigour while at Moscow was no less than it had always been; 
plans and orders followed each other without interruption all 
the time he was there; the absence of the inhabitants, the lack 
of deputations, the conflagration even, never checked him for 
an instant. He never lost sight of the enemy's movements, of 
the well-being of his troops, and of the Russian population close 
at hand, of the management of his empire, of diplomatic com- 
plications, or of the conditions to be discussed, with a view to 
concluding a peace at an early date. 


CHAPTER LXXX 


As soon as he arrived at Moscow, Napoleon's first care was 
to order General Sébastiani to watch the movements of the 
Russian troops, and to enjoin Murat to discover Koutouzow's 
position. Then he carefully fortified the Kremlin, and elaborated 
a capital scheme for a campaign in Russia. Passing from 
military matters to diplomacy, he sent for Captain Iakovlew, 
who made his appearance ruined and in rags, explained to him 
at full length his policy and his magnanimous conduct, and 
wrote a letter to the Czar Alexander, in which he expatiated to 
his “friend and brother” on his dissatisfaction at Rostopchine’s 
conduct, and sent off Iakovlew to St. Petersburg. After having 
in the same way unfolded his scheme, and paraded his high- 
mindedness to Toutolmine, he sent him off to St. Petersburg to 


241 


WAR AND PEACE 


start negotiations. In judicial matters he sought out the in- 
cendiaries, punished them, and revenged himself on Rostopchine 
by having his houses burnt; in affairs of administration, he drew 
up a constitution which he presented to Moscow, established a 
municipality, and had the following proclamation posted about 
the town: 


“Inhabitants of Moscow! 


“Your sufferings are terrible, but his majesty the emperor 
and king will put an end to them. He has taught you by 
some terrible examples that he can punish rebellion and crime. 
Very severe measures have been taken to check disorder, and 
re-establish public safety. A municipality will be formed for 
the paternal administration of the town ; the members will be 
elected from among yourselves, and it will be their duty to 
watch over you, and take care of your needs and your interests. 
These members will be distinguished by wearing a red ribbon 
across the shoulder, and the mayor will, besides, wear a white 
scarf. During the hours when he is not occupied in the duties 
of his office, he will only wear a red ribbon round his left arm. 
The police of the city is re-formed on its old footing, and thanks 
to its exertions, order is being restored. The government has 
appointed two high commissioners or heads of police, and 
twenty commissioners for the various districts of the town; 
they are recognisable by the white ribbon tied round the left 
arm. Several churches of various sects are left open, and 
Service in them will not be interfered with. Your fellow- 
citizens are returning to their dwellings, and orders have been 
given that they are to find such help and protection as are due 
to misfortune. These are the steps taken by the government 
up till the present moment with a view to restoring order and 
alleviating your situation, but for their ultimate success, it is 
indispensable that you should second these efforts by your own, 
that you should forget as far as possible your past sufferings, 
that you should cherish a hope of a happier future, that you 
should understand that a shameful death will be the fate of 
all who attack your persons or your property, and that your 
property will certainly be secured to you, since such is the will 
of the greatest and justest of monarchs. 

“Soldiers and citizens, of whatever race or nation, aid in 
restoring that public confidence which is the source of national 
happiness; live as brethren, help and protect each other; 
combine to frustrate the designs of the evil-minded, obey 


242 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


authority, whether civil or military, and soon your tears will 
cease to flow.” 


With regard to provision, Napoleon issued an order that 
the troops should come in regular turns to Moscow, and by 
freebooty, acquire supplies which would suffice to victual each 
regiment for a certain time. In the matter of religion he 
decreed that the popes should return and reorganise all the 
ceremonial worship in the churches. The following manifesto, 
relating to trade, and the importation of victuals, was also 
placarded on all the walls: 


* Peaceable citizens of Moscow, artisans and factory hands, 
who have been driven out of town by the recent catastrophes, 
and you also, peasants and farmers, who are kept from coming 
in from the country by groundless fears, attend. ‘he capital 
is restored to order, and peace reigns there; your fellow- 
countrymen are by degrees coming out of their hiding-places, 
being assured of protection. Every act of violence to them 
or their property is immediately punished. His majesty the 
emperor and king is your protector, and regards none as his 
enemies but those who rebel against his decrees; he only wishes 
to put an end to your misfortunes, and restore you to your 
hearths and families. Respond to his beneficent measures, by 
returning without fear of danger. Citizens, return to your 
dwellings in perfect confidence; you will soon find the means 
of obtaining all you need. Artisans and labourers, take up 
your trades again; your houses and shops are waiting for you, 
protected by a patrol, and your toil will receive its reward. 
You, peasants, come out from the woods where you are lurking 
in terror, return to your huts, and be assured that you will be 
protected in them. There are storehouses in the town, where 
the tillers of the soil may deposit their produce, and the fruits 
of the earth. 

*'The Government has adopted the following measures for 
the regulation of sales: First, from to-day the peasants and 
farmers of the neighbourhood of Moscow may with perfect 
security place provisions of every description in the two store- 
houses in the Mokhovaia and the Okhotny-riad. Second, 
These articles of consumption shall be bought and sold at 
prices to be agreed upon between the seller and the buyer; 
but if the seller does not receive the price agreed upon, he has 
a right to carry back his merchandise to his own village, with- 
outlet or hindrance. Third, Sunday and Wednesday in every 


243 


WAR AND PEACE 


week are appointed as market-days, and a sufficient number of 
troops will be stationed on Saturdays and Tuesdays along the 
various high roads to a certain distance from the town, to 
protect the carts and waggons. Fourth, similar means will be 
taken to protect the peasants and their vehicles on their return. 
Fifth, the ordinary fairs and markets will be reopened as soon 
as practicable. 

“Inhabitants of town and country, workmen and artisans, 
whatever your race or nation, you are hereby invited to carry 
into effect the paternal regulations of his majesty the emperor 
and king, and so to contribute to the common good. Come to 
his feet with respect and confidence, and hasten to join us.” 


To raise the tone and spirits of the army and the people, he 
held reviews and distributed rewards, showed himself in the 
streets, spoke comfort to the citizens, and, notwithstanding the 
cares of State, went to the theatres, which were reopened by 
his desire. In the matter of beneficent institutions, the fairest 
gem in a monarch’s crown, Napoleon did all that it was possible 
for a mere human being to accomplish. He had the facades of 
public asylums inscribed as “maison de ma mère” (my mother’s 
home), thus suggesting a happy union of filial piety with benefi- 
cent majesty; he inspected the Foundling Hospital, held out 
his white hand to be kissed by the children he had saved, 
and expressed himself most graciously to Toutolmine. Then, 
according to M. Thiers’ eloquent narrative, he paid his troops 
with forged Russian notes. “As a set-off to the adoption of such 
a course, and as an action worthy of himself and the French 
army, he ordered that help should be distributed to those who 
had been burnt out of house and home. But as provisions 
were too precious to be given away to strangers, most of them 
hostile to him, he preferred to bestow money, and this too was 
paid in paper roubles.” Finally, with a view to preserving 
discipline, he continued to give constant orders about severe 
punishments for infringement of duty, and against all found in 
the act of plunder. 


244 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


CHAPTER LXXXI 


STILL, strange to say, all these measures, which were in no 
respect inferior to those he had taken elsewhere under similar 
circumstances, only affected the surface, as the hands of a clock 
when detached fromm the mechanism may be turned round and 
round without making the wheels act. 

M. Thiers, in speaking of Napoleon's remarkable military 
scheme, observes that “‘his genius had never devised anything 
more comprehensive, skilfil and admirable;" and in his 
dispute with M. Fain he shows that the promulgation of it 
must be dated not the 4th, but the 15th of October. But this 
"remarkable scheme" never was, and never could have been 
carried out, because it was inapplicable to the immediate 
circumstances. The fortifications of the Kremlin—for which 
"the Mosque," as Napoleon chose to call the cathedra! of Saint 
Basil, had to be destroyed—came to nothing, the undermining 
of the Kremlin never served any purpose than that of gratifying 
the invader's wish to blow up this church on leaving Moscow 
—like a child who, to comfort himself for a fall, beats the floor 
against which he has bruised himself. The pursuit of the 
Russian army which caused Napoleon so much anxiety, ended 
in an extraordinary result: the French generals entirely lost 
track of these 60,000 men! And according to M. Thiers, it was 
only the talent—or perhaps genius—of Murat which was equal 
to the task of rediscovering this speck, this handful of men. 

In his diplomatic efforts Napoleon's arguments to prove to 
Toutolmine and Iakovlew his generosity and justice were 
equally thrown away: the czar would not receive his ambas- 
sadors, and returned no answer to his messages. As to his 
judicial administration: after the execution of the supposed 
incendiaries, the other half of Moscow was burnt to the ground. 
Nor were his other measures more successful: the establish- 
ment of the municipal authority did not check rapine, and 
benefited no one but the officials appointed; they, indeed, 
under pretext of re-establishing order, plundered on their own 
account, or devoted their energies to the preservation of their 
own property. 

In matters of religion, though the imperial visit to a mosque 
had been a great success in Egypt, such a step had no effect in 
Moscow. Two or three priests did indeed attempt to obey the 
imperial mandate, but one had his face slapped by a French 


245 


WAR AND PEACE 


soldier while in the act of performing the service; and of another 
an official wrote as follows: “A priest, whom I found out and 
requested to resume his duties, cleaned and closed the church. 
In the course of the night the doors were forced open, the 
padlocks broken, the books torn, and other mischief done.” 
With regard to trade, the proclamation addressed to the “ peace- 
able artisans and peasants” elicited no response, for the simple 
reason that there were no peaceable artisans, and that the 
peasants turned on the messengers who wandered so far as to 
find them and killed them without mercy. 

The plays got up for the amusement of the populace were 
no less a failure; the theatres, opened in the Kremlin and the 
Pozniakow-house, were closed again immediately, for the per- 
formers were despoiled of all they possessed. His benevolence, _ 
again, bore no fruit; the paper money, false and real, so liberally 
distributed to the sufferers, was a drug in Moscow, and absolutely 
worthless; indeed, even silver was depreciated to about half its 
value, for the French would take nothing but gold. 

The most signal proof of the absence of vitality in all these 
arrangements lies in the unavailing efforts made by Napoleon 
to put a stop to plundering and restore discipline. The pro- 
clamations of the military authorities in fact said as much. 

“Pillage continues in the city, in spite of repeated prohibi- 
tions; order is not re-established; not a tradesman carries on 
bis regular business; only the camp-followers have articles for 
sale, and those are stolen goods." 

" My district continues to be pillaged by the men of the 3rd 
Corps, who are not content with stripping the poor creatures 
who have taken refuge in underground cellars, of what little 
they have saved, but are so brutal as to wound them with 
sword-cuts; several instances of this have come to my 
knowledge.” 

“Nothing new has occurred; the soldiers still venture to rob 
and pillage the people. (October oth.)" 

“Plunder and pillage continue. In our district there is a band of 
robbers who must be arrested by an armed force. (October 1 Ith.)" 

"The emperor is highly displeased to find that notwith- 
standing the stringency of his orders, the soldiers who come into 
the Kremlin are all marauders, though in the Guards; and it 
grieves him to perceive that picked men, specially chosen to 
guard his person, and whose duty it is to set an example of 
obedience, go so far in rebellion as to force open the doors of 
the cellars made into magazines of stores for the army. Others 


246 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


have fallen so low as to defy the sentinels and officers on guard, 
to insult them, and even to fight them.” 

“The high steward of the palace complains bitterly that, in 
spite of repeated prohibitions, the soldiers commit every kind 
of nuisance in the courtyards, even within sight of his majesty’s 
windows.” 

This great army was melting and wasting away under the 
influence of the place and circumstances, like a herd of cattle 
run wild and trampiing down the fodder ‘that might save them 
from starvation. It did not recover from its torpor till it was 
roused by a sudden panic on hearing that some convoys had 
been seized on the Smolensk road, followed by the news of the 
fight at Taroutino. This reached. Napoleon at the moment he 
was holding a review. As M. Thiers tells us, it fired him with 
a desire to punish the Russians. He at once gave orders for 
the depar ure which the whole army was longing for. 

They fled from Moscow, taking with them all they could 
carry; Napoleon himself clung to his own private treasure. 
The enormous baggage-trains that hampered his movements 
alarmed him, it is true; still, with all his experience, he did 
not give the 'order to burn the wagons, as he insisted on one 
of his marshals doing on the march to Moscow. These chariots 
and carts full of men and booty found grace in his eyes, because 
—as he said—they might afterwards be found useful for 
carrying provisions or the sick and wounded. 

Is not the position in which the French found themselves 
like that of a wounded animal, aware that death is at hand and 
driven mad by terror? Are not Napoleon’s crafty manceuvring 
and magnificent schemes, from the hour when he entered 
Moscow till the final catastrophe, strangely like the leaping and 
convulsions which precede the death of the wounded beast? 

Frightened by some noise he rushes forward, on to the 
huntsman's knife; then, mortally stricken, he flies again, and 
so hastens his end. Napoleon, under the pressure of his army, 
did just the same. The rumour of the battle of Taroutino 
scared him, and he hurried forward; he felt the knife and 
returned as he had come, only to set out again on the worst 
chosen and most perilous road, the road he had already traversed 
and known. 

Napoleon, who stands forth as the leader of the movement 
—just as to savages the figure-head of a vessel represents its 
guiding mind—was, at this crisis, just like a child who pulls at 
the straps inside a coach and fancies he helps it forward. 


247 


WAR AND PEACE 


CHAPTER LXXXII 


On the 6th (18th) October, Peter stepped out of the prison- 
shed and stood in the doorway, playing with the little bandy- 
legged dog that commonly slept at Karataiew’s feet; the dog 
frequently made excursions into the town, but returned faithfully 
every evening. The Frenchmen named him ‘‘Azor”; Plato 
called him “the grey one” or “Grey.” No one had claimed 
him, and there was no name on the collar. The poor brute 
did not seem at all distressed at having no master, and being 
of no particular breed; he carried his feathery tail boldly, and 
his crooked legs did him such good service that he often scorned 
to use all four at once, and would trot along on three with one à 
hind paw gracefully picked up. Every incident was a pleasure 
to him; he would roll on his back, or bask in the sun with a look 
of pensive importance, or play with a chip of wood or a straw. 

Peter’s wardrobe now consisted of a dirty, ragged shirt—the 
last relic of his original garments, a pair of soldier’s trousers 
tied round above the ankles, by Plato’s advice, to keep his legs 
warmer, and a caftan. His appearance was greatly altered; 
his corpulence had diminished, but his large frame was still 
the ideal of physical strength; a thick beard and moustache 
hid the lower part of his face; his long, matted and dirty hair 
fell from under his round cap; the expression in his eyes was 
calmer and steadier than of yore, and his easy-going indolence 
had given place to a look of ready energy. His feet were bare. 
He stood gazing alternately at the plain, where wagons and 
men on horseback could be seen moving, at the river sparkling 
below, at the dog pretending to bite him in play, and at his own 
bare and dirty feet, and putting them into attitudes—smiling 
all the while with beatific satisfaction as he thought over all 
he had endured and learnt during these last days. 

The weather was mild and bright. It was St. Martin's 
Summer,! with the light hoar-frosts which give a tonic sharp- 
ness to the morning sunshine, and revive and stimulate the 
frame. That magical crystalline brilliancy which is never seen 
excepting in the clearest autumn day, shone over all the land- 
scape. Far away rose the Sparrow hills, with the village and 
the green belfry of the church; the roofs, the sandy roads, the 


1 Equivalent to the Indian summer. The gleam of fine weather which 
often comes between St. Luke's day, October 18th, and St. Martin's, 
November rrth. In French /'Efé de St. Martin, and in England called 
St. Luke's Summer, 


248 


He stood gazing alternately at the plain and at the river sparkling below 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


rocks, the leafless trees stood in sharp outline against the 
transparent sky. A few yards away from the hovel were the 
ruins of a half-burnt house, occupied by the French; it stood 
in a garden of stunted lilac-bushes, and this house, which under 
a gloomy sky would have been the picture of desolation, under 
this flood of light looked, on the contrary, peaceful and happy. 
A French corporal, with his coat unbuttoned, a foraging-cap on 
his head, and a broken pipe between his teeth, came up to 
Peter with a friendly wink: “What splendid sunshine! eh, 
Monsieur Kiril?” (the name by which Peter was called by the 
French). “It might be spring-time," and leaning against the 
door-post he asked him—as he did every day, always to be 
refused—to smoke a pipe with him. “If only we have weather 
like this for our march!” 

Peter anxiously asked him if he had any news. The old 
soldier told him that the troops were being moved out of the 
town, and that the order of the day was expected to contain 
some instructions as to the prisoners. Peter reminded him 
that one of them, named Sokolow, was dangerously ill, and that 
some steps must be taken for his comfort. 

“Be quite easy, Monsieur Kiril; we have capital ambulance 
waggons, and the authorities make it their business to provide 
for all emergencies. Besides, you know, Monsieur Kiril, you 
have only to say a word to the captain. Oh, he is one of those 
who never forget. You just speak to the captain when you 
see him; he will do anything for you.” 

The captain in question often talked with Peter, and expressed 
a great liking for him. 

“T tell you what, says he to me one day—‘Kiril is a well- 
educated man, and can speak French; he is a Russian noble- 
man who has got into trouble, but he is a man.’ And he knows 
what he is talking about, he does. ‘If he asks for anything,’ 
says he, ‘see that he has it.’ You see, when a man is a scholar 
himself he likes to meet with other scholars and men who 
know what’s what. It is for your sake I say it, Monsieur 
Kiril. In that job the other day, you know—it would have 
been a worse job if it had not been for you." And having 
gossiped for some time, away he went. 

The “job” he had alluded to was a squabble between the 
prisoners and the French. Peter had been lucky enough to 
succeed in pacifying his companions. 

Some of them, having seen him talking to the corporal, came 
up to ask for news; just as he was telling them what he had 


249 


WAR AND PEACE 


heard, a French soldier, with a pinched, yellow face, and 
dressed in rags, joined them. He raised his hand to his cap in 
salute, and asked Peter whether Platoche, the man to whom he 
had given a shirt to make, was in this hut. Leather and 
shirting had been given out to the French army the week before, 
and they had given them to the Russian prisoners to be made 
into boots and shirts. 

“Here you are, it is quite ready!” said Plato, bringing out 
the article in question neatly folded up. In honour of the fine 
weather, or perhaps to work more at his ease, Plato had nothing 
on but a pair of drawers and a torn shirt as black as soot. 
His hair was tied up with a strip of bast, as workmen do, 
and it seemed to give an added charm to his broad good- 
humoured face. : 

"Make a bargain and stick to it!" said he,! “I promised it 
on Friday, and here it is." 

The Frenchman glanced uneasily round ; then, conquering 
his bashfulness, he took off his uniform and put on the shirt, 
for he had nothing under his coat but a long and filthy em- 
broidered silk waistcoat, which scantily covered his half-starved 
body. He evidently was afraid of being laughed at; but no 
one took the slightest notice of him. 

“Just fits you," observed Plato, pulling down the shirt, 
while the Frenchman put his arms through the sleeves and 
carefully examined the sewing. “You see, my good friend, 
this is not exactly a tailor's shop; we have notbing fit to sew 
with, and you know you must have a weapon even to kill 
vermin." 

“All right—quite right, thank you,” said the Frenchman, 
“but there must be some pieces left.” 

“It will fit you better when you have worn it a little while," 
Plato went on, admiring his own work. 

“Thank you, old chap—but the pieces?” 

Peter, perceiving that Plato was making a point of not 
understanding French, would not say a word. Plato thanked 
the Frenchman for his pay, and the Frenchman persisted in 
asking for what was left of the linen; at last Peter thought he 
had better explain to Plato what his customer wanted. 

“What can he want with the pieces? I might have found 
them useful; however, if he will have them . s Cndaid 
Karataiew, much against his will, pulled out of his shirt front 
a little packet of scraps neatly tied up, gave it to the French- 

! " Agreement is first cousin to good business,"—Russian proverb. 


250 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


man without a word, and then turned on his heel. The man 
looked at the pieces as if he were debating the matter in his 
mind; and then he looked inquiringly at Peter, and suddenly 
colouring up, he said: 

“Platoche, I say, Platoche, you can keep this. . . .” And, 
stuffing it into his hand, hurried away. 

“And they say they are not Christian souls—but there goes 
a kind heart! It is a true saying that a moist hand shows a 
giver, and a dry hand a niggard—he has hardly a rag to wear, 
and yet he made me a present. All right, my friend, I shall 
find a use for it... ." And he went into the hut with a 
smile of content. 


CHAPTER LXXXIII 


PETER had now been a prisoner for four weeks, and though 
the French had offered to remove him from the hut where the 
privates were housed to that given up to the officers, he would 
not accept. He had to endure the greatest privations; but his 
strong constitution and robust health were impervious to them, 
especially as they only came on him by degrees; he even felt 
a certain pleasure in defying them. At last he found himself 
possessed of that peace of mind and satisfaction with himself 
that he had hitherto so vainly longed for. This it was that had 
struck him in the soldiers at Borodino, and that he had vainly 
sought in philanthropic efforts, in freemasonry, in the amuse- 
ments of a wordly life, in drink, in the heroism of self-sacrifice, 
in his romantic passion for Natacha—and suddenly the horrors 
of death and Plato's philosophical resignation had given birth 
in his soul to that soothing moral contentment, of which he 
had always felt the lack. The intolerable anguish of mind he 
had gone through while his miserable companions were shot 
had cleared his brain for ever of the restless thoughts and 
aspirations which he had formerly believed to be of such 
supreme importance. 25 

He thought no more about Russia, or the war, or politics, or 
Napoleon. He understood that nothing of all this concerned 
him, that he was not required to judge events as they happened; 
and his purpose of killing Napoleon struck him not merely as 
preposterous, but as ridiculous, not less so than his cabbalistic 
calculations of the number of the Beast in the Apocalypse 


251 


WAR AND PEACE 


His wrath against his wife, and his horror of seeing his name 
dishonoured, appeared futile and absurd. After all, what did it 
matter to him that the woman should lead the life she liked 
best, or that it should become known that one of the prisoners 
was named Count Bésoukhow? 

His thoughts often turned to Prince Andrew, who was wont 
to declare, with a shade of bitterness and irony, that happiness 
was purely negative, and that all our cravings for real happiness 
were given us for our torment, since they could never be ful- 
filled. But at this very time Peter was ready to accept the 
mere absence of pain, the satisfaction of the elementary needs 
of life, and consequently a free choice of occupation and mode 
of life, as the ideal of earthly happiness. Here, for the first 
time—because he was bereft of them—did he appreciate the 
joys of eating when he was hungry, of drinking when he was 
thirsty, of resting when he was sleepy, of warming himself 
when he was cold, and talking when he longed for human 
intercourse. He forgot one thing, however: namely, that 
abundance of wordly goods diminishes our pleasure in using 
them, and that too much liberty in choosing our occupations, 
since it arises from education, wealth and social position, 
renders the choice complicated, dificult, and often useless. All 
Peter’s thoughts centred on the hour when he should again be 
free; and yet, afterwards, he often looked back on that month 
of captivity, and would speak with enthusiasm of the vivid 
and impressive sensation, and even more of the moral peace 
that had been borne in upon him at that period of his life. 

On the first morning of his imprisonment, when he woke at 
daybreak and stole to the door of the hut to look out at the 
still dark forms of the cupolas and crosses of Novo-Diévitchi, 
the white frost glistening on the dusty grass, and the wooded 
slopes of the Sparrow hills, vanishing in grey mist—as the 
fresh breeze fanned his cheek, as he heard the flapping of the 
crows’ wings across the fields, as he watched the daylight 
chasing the night-fogs, the sun rising in glory behind the clouds 
and the domes of the city, while the crosses, the dew, the 
distance and the river sparkled joyously in the splendour of 
his rays—his heart overflowed with emotion. This emotion 
stayed with him and increased his strength a hundredfold in 
proportion as the perils of his position increased. 

This frame of mind also raised him in the estimation of his 
companions in captivity. His knowledge of languages, the 
respect paid to him even by the F rench, his simplicity, kindli- 


252 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


ness, steadfastness and humility in his intercourse with his 
fellow-men, even his faculty of becoming utterly lost in deep 
meditation, all combined to make him appear a mysterious and 
superior being. The very qualities which, in his own rank of 
life, were a disadvantage and a hindrance, here made almost a 
hero of him, and he felt that the estimation in which he was 
held brought with it special duties. 


CHAPTER LXXXIV 


Tue French retreat began on the night of the 6th (18th) of 
October; they dismantled their huts and kitchens, wagons 
were loaded, troops and baggage-trains were on the move in 
every quarter. By seven o'clock on the morning of the roth, 
an escort of French soldiers in marching order—shakos, muskets 
shouldered, and knapsacks packed and strapped—were drawn 
up in front of the guard-house, exchanging a cross-fire of 
questions interlarded with oaths all along the line. Inside 
the hut the prisoners were all dressed and shod ready to start 
and waiting for the word of command. Only poor Sokolow, 
pale and exhausted, was neither clothed nor shod, but lay 
groaning miserably. His eyes seemed starting out of the dark 
circles that surrounded them, and gazed inquiringly at his 
companions, who were not troubling themselves about him. 
It was not so much the pain he was suffering—his complaint 
was dysentery—as the dread of being left to his fate that was 
racking him. Peter—who had got a pair of boots that Plato 
had made for him, and had knotted a rope round his waist for 
a belt—squatted down on his heels by the bedside. 

* Listen to me, Sokolow, they are not going away altogether. 
They are leaving a hospital here, and you will very likely be 
better off than we shall be in the end." 

*Oh, Lord! It will be the death of me—oh, Lord! have 
pity!" groaned the soldier piteously. “I will go and speak to 
them—shall I?" said Peter, and he rose and went to the door. 

Just then a corporal came in with a file of soldiers in marching 
order. The corporal—the same who had offered Peter a pipe 
the day before—came to call over the roll of prisoners. 

“Corporal, what is to become of the sick man?” asked 
Peter, who hardly recognised his friend, so different did he lock 
in his shako and tightly-buttoned collar from the man he had 


235 


WAR AND PEACE 


been accustomed to see. He frowned and muttered some 
brutal but unintelligible remark; then he slammed the door 
violently and the hut was almost dark; the drums were beating 
to arms on both sides, and drowned the sick man’s complaining. 
“Yes, there it is again—I know it well!" thought Peter, with 
an involuntary shudder. In the corporal’s altered mien, in the 
ring of his voice, in the deafening rattle of the drums, he had 
recognised the presence of that stolid and mysterious brute 
force which drives men to kill each other—the force he had 
been so conscious of during the execution of his companions, 
To dream of escaping from it, to entreat those who had become 
its instruments, was, he knew, vain; there was nothing for it 
but to wait in patience. So he stood at the door and said no 
more. 4 

When it was next opened, for the prisoners to pass out like 
a flock of sheep, he got in front and went towards the captain, 
who, as the corporal had told him, was so well disposed to serve 
him. The captain too was in marching order, and his face 
wore the same hard, set look. 

“Get on, get on!” he said to the prisoners, as they went past 
him. Though Peter felt that it was useless he went up to him. 

“Well, what now?" said the captain roughly, as though he 
did not recognise Peter. “He can walk, I suppose, devil take 
it!” he answered to Peter's inquiry. 

“He is dying,” said Peter. 

“Will you mind . . .” cried the captain, in a rage. 

And the drums rattled on, and Peter felt that words would 
be wasted. These men had sold their souls ; they were the 
slaves of that force. 

The prisoners who were officers were separated from the 
privates, and ordered to lead the way. There were thirty 
officers, including Peter, and three hundred privates. The 
officers, who came out of neighbouring huts, were all strangers 
to Peter and much better dressed, and they cast a doubtful eye 
on him. In front of him walked a burly major in a plaid 
dressing-gown, a towel round his waist for a scarf; his face was 
bloated, yellow, and sour; in one hand he held his tobacco 
pouch and in the other a long pipe. He was quite out of 
breath, and kept up an incessant growl: “He was being pushed, 
they were crowding without reason and astonished without 
cause." 

Another officer, a small, slim man, turned first to one and 
then to another, asking where they were being taken and how 


254 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


many versts made the first stage. A functionary in felt boots 
and commissariat uniform turned from right to left as he went, 
seeing what he could see of the burnt town and making loud 
comments on what he had seen, telling everybody what part 
of Moscow was burnt and what was still standing, communi- 
cating to all within nearing his feelings as they marched through 
the wrecked city. A third, a Pole, discussed the matter eagerly, 
trying to prove to him that he was mistaken in his identification 
of the different quarters. 

“What need you quarrel about?” said the major fractiously. 
“What can it matter whether it was Saint Nicholas or Saint 
Basil? You see it is all burnt down. Now, then, what are 
you pushing me for? it is not for want of room at any rate,” 
he snarled at one of his neighbours, who had not even touched 
him. 

“Oh, Lord, oh, Lord! What have they done!” cried the 
men, looking about them at the ruins. 

* Why, quite half the city must be burnt down!” 

“T told you so. It spread to the other side of the river.” 

“Well, it is burnt, and you know it!” scolded the major. 
‘What is the use of talking?” 

As they were marching through one of the few streets that 
had remained intact the whole file suddenly started back as they 
passed a church, with cries of horror and disgust. 

“Oh! the wretches! the savages! It is a dead body, and 
they have smeared his face. . . .” 

Peter looked round and could make out a figure propped up 
against the wall of the churchyard. From the exclamations of 
his neighbours he understood that it was a corpse set up on its 
feet with the face blackened with soot. 

* Move on, will you? Move on!” shouted the officers with 
thundering oaths, and the French soldiers drove on the mob of 
prisoners who had stopped in front of the dead man, hitting 
them with the flat of their swords. 


255 


WAR AND PEACE 


CHAPTER LXXXV 


THE whole party came to a halt presently near the depot of 
stores; the prisoners had met no one so far on their way through 
the narrow streets with their escort and the wagons, but here 
they overtook a battery of artillery which could hardly get 
forward, as a number of private carriages had got mixed up 
with the fieldpieces and caissons. At the head of the bridge 
everyone had to wait till their turn came to cross it. In front 
and behind nothing was to be seen but the endless line of 
vehicles and the army train, while to the right, where the 
Kalouga road branched off, an enormous body of troops with 
their baggage and horses stretched away till they were lost to 
sight; this was Beauharnais’ corps, which had been the first to 
get out of the town. Behind, along the quays and across the 
Stone Bridge, came the division commanded by Ney; Davoust’s 
corps, of which the prisoners formed a section, were to cross 
the Krimski Brod ! (the Crimea Ford). 

Having done so they were again compelled to halt; but 
after a few minutes’ waiting went on again in the midst of a 
throng of men and vehicles, shoving and jostling on all sides. 
They were more than an hour getting along the hundred yards 
between the bridge and the Kalouga road. When they reached 
the open place where the roads meet, the prisoners were crowded 
together, and kept there for some hours. The air was full of 
an incessant roll, like the loud murmur of the sea, caused by 
the rumble of wheels and the tramp of hoofs, broken by curses 
and shouts on every side. Peter, flattened against the wall of 
a burnt-out house, listened vaguely to this uproar, which in his 
fancy was one with the rattle of the drums. Some of his 
companions hoisted themselves up and perched on the wall 
above him. 

“What crowds and streams of people. Look what they’ve 
loaded on the guns! Furs! All looted! The blackguards! 
Out there—they are carrying off an image! Great God! 
Those are Germans you may be certain. The wretches! and 
they have loaded themselves till they can scarcely drag them- 
selves along. What next? There is one with a drosky! and 
a man in it sitting on his trunks. They deserve a flogging, 
that they do! And this will go on till nightfall. Look, look 
there! Are not those Napoleon's horses? What fine beasts! 


! This too, however, seems to be in fact a bridge. 


256 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


and what trappings! With such grand monograms and crowns! 
Lord! there is no end of it! And there are some girls. Look! 
Russian girls, sitting in those carriages!” 

All the prisoners pressed forward, and Peter, being taller 
than the rest, could see the carriages that had excited their 
curiosity, over their heads. Three chariots had got in among 
the caissons, and were very slowly moving forward; they 
contained a party of women, painted and bedizened in showy 
colours, and all screaming at the top of their voices. From the 
moment when Peter had distinctly recognised the mysterious 
power which, under given conditions, completely masters men, 
nothing could startle him: neither the corpse desecrated to be 
the laughing stock of the mob, nor the women wandering God 
knows whither, nor the burning of the city. It seemed as 
though his spirit was preparing for a desperate struggle and 
would not yield to any emotion that might impair its powers. 
The women went past, and after them the long line of soldiers, 
télegues, baggage-wagons, carriages, caissons, and then more and 
yet more soldiers, with here and there a few women. 

During these hours of waiting Peter’s attention was dis- 
tracted by the endless general stir, and he noted nothing in 
particular. All, men and horses alike, seemed to be propelled 
by an invisible force, and to have but one object: that, namely, 
of outstripping each other; they jostled, pushed, swore, shook 
their fists, showed their teeth; and on every face was stamped 
that same hard, stern look which had struck Peter so forcibly 
that morning when he had seen its mark on the corporal. 

At last the officer in charge saw an opening ahead and got 
his party as far as the Kalouga road. After this they went 
on without stopping, and never halted again till sunset. The 
horses were unharnessed, and the men, swearing, shouting, and 
quarrelling, prepared to sleep under the stars. A carriage 
which had kept close to them presently had a shaft driven 
through the side of one of the officers’ chariots; a mob of 
soldiers rushed across, some to flog the horses, others to snatch 
at the reins, and each and all to fight on the slightest pretence; 
in fact, a German was badly hurt by a blow on the head. 

It seemed as though a universal and violent reaction had 
come over all these men after the disorderly excitement of the 
day’s march, as soon as they had halted in the open country 
under the damp twilight of an autumn evening. They seemed 
to be just beginning to comprehend that the end of their pilgrim- 
age was unknown to them, and that many miseries awaited 


257 


WAR AND PEACE 


them on the way. The soldiers in charge of the prisoners 
treated them far more brutally than they had done in their 
town quarters; and here, for the first time, they were fed on 
horse-flesh. All, from the officers to the privates, displayed 
a grudging ill-will in strong contrast to their former good- 
nature. This bad feeling was increased when the names were 
called over and it was ascertained that a Russian soldier had 
escaped under pretence of a sharp attack of colic; and Peter 
saw another beaten by a Frenchman for wandering too far 
from the high road, while his former friend, the captain, rated 
the corporal smartly for allowing the man to escape, threatening 
to have him tried by court-martial. The corporal replied that 
the man was too ill to walk, and the captain retorted that 
stragglers were to be shot. Peter felt that the brute force 
which had once already almost crushed him, again had him in 
its clutches, and he was afraid; still the nearer he was to the 
fatal grip the more did his own vital force assert itself in his 
soul, independently of all external influences. 

He supped off rye porridge and a piece of horse-flesh, and sat 
chattering with his companions. They spoke not a word of 
the scenes they had witnessed at Moscow, nor of the brutal 
behaviour of the French, nor of the order to shoot them in the 
event of their escaping; only of their personal reminiscences, 
and certain comical incidents of past campaigns;—this was 
quite enough to put them into good spirits and make them 
forget for the moment how critical was their position. 

The sun had long been set, the stars flashed out one by one, 
and the round full moon was rising luridly red from the horizon, 
suggesting memories of the fires; but presently it glided above 
the grey mists and shed its pale light on the earth. The evening 
was over but it was not night. Peter got up, left his new 
comrades, and was making his way between the camp-fires to 
the other side of the road, where he was told that the common 
soldiers who were prisoners were encamped. A sentinel stopped 
him, and he was obliged to retrace his steps; but instead of 
rejoining the officers he sat down on the ground behind one of 
the carts, and doubling up his knees bent his head over them 
and gave himself up to thought. For more than an hour he 
was forgotten by everyone around him, but suddenly he went 
off into such an uproarious fit of laughter—that frank, boyish 
laughter which shook him from head to foot—that everyone 
within hearing turned round at this strange explosion of mirth. 

“Ha, ha!” said Peter, talking to himself. “So he would 


258 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


not let me pass! I was caught, shut up—I am still a prisoner! 
I—what is ‘I’ My immortal soul? Ha, ha, ha!” And he 
laughed till he cried. 

A solaier got up and came to see what could have so tickled 
this Hercules; Peter stopped laughing; he, too, rose, and 
turning away from the inquisitive intruder, looked on the scene 
around him. All was silent in the camp, which a few hours 
since had been alive with voices and the crackling of the fires 
which were now smouldering and dying out. The moon rode 
overhead; the woods and fields, before indistinguishable, were 
now clearly visible, and beyond the plain and the forest the eye 
lost itself in the depths of an infinite distance. Peter looked 
up at the sky where myriads of stars palely twinkled. 

“All that is mine," thought he. “All that is in me, one 
with me! And could they take that, and shut that up in a 
hut?” 


CHAPTER LXXXVI 


OnE day in October a messenger delivered into Koutouzow's 
hand a letter from Napoleon, which hinted at conditions of 
peace; but it was falsely dated from Moscow, for Napoleon 
when he wrote it was on the old Kalouga road, only a little 
way from the Russian van. Koutouzow replied to this letter, 
as he had to the former one, brought by Lauriston, that he 
could discuss no terms of peace. 

Not long after this it was reported by Dorokhow, who was in 
command of a corps of skirmishers, that the enemy's forces in 
position at Fominsk consisted of Broussier’s division only, and 
that this, being detached from the rest of the army, might be 
easily demolished. Officers and soldiers loudly prayed to be 
relieved from inaction, and the generals on the staff, remem- 
bering the easy victory at Taroutino, implored Koutouzow to 
accede to Dorokhow’s wish. However, the commander-in-chief 
till refused to act on the offensive. The result was a com- 
promise, a small force went to attack Broussier. 

By a ‘singular chance this highly-important undertaking—as 
t proved to be—was entrusted to Dokhtourow, a man whose 
nodest demeanour had gained for him, without any reason, a 
character for indecision and want of foresight; so that no one 
ias even thought of speaking of him, as of so many others, as 
laborating plans for engagements, rushing on at the head of 


259 


WAR AND PEACE 


his regiment, or scattering crosses broadcast on the batteries. 
Nevertheless this same Dokhtourow was always to be seen in all 
the wars with France, from Austerlitz down to 1813, and 
leading all the most difficult movements. He was the last to 
remain at Aughest after the battle of Austerlitz, re-forming the 
regiments, and saving all that could be saved in that rout, 
when there was not a general left with the rear. Though 
suffering from fever he led 20,000 men to the defence of Smolensk 
against Napoleon’s overwhelming host. No sooner had he got 
there and lain down to snatch some uneasy slumber, than he 
was roused by the roar of cannon; but Smolensk held out all 
that day. At Borodino again, when Bagration was killed, 
when the Russian left wing had lost nine out of every ten, 
while the whole strength of the French artillery was directed 
against it, it was Dokhtourow, “undecided and unforeseeing," 
whom Koutouzow hastily sent forward, to repair the blunder 
he had committed in making a worse choice at first. Dokhtourow 
went, and Borodino was made glorious. 

So it was Dokhtourow who was sent to Fominsk, and then to 
Malo-Yaroslavetz, where, it may be said, without fear of con- 
tradiction, that the real disasters of the French began. Many 
a genius and many a hero of that time has been sung in verse 
and praised in prose; but very little has been said about 
Dokhtourow, and when he is mentioned, it is in terms of 
doubtful praise. 

On the roth (22nd) of October, Dokhtourow stopped half- 
way to Fominsk, at the village of Aristow, and was preparing 
to carry out Koutouzow's orders, and on the same day the 
French army, which, atter much disorderly marching and 
counter-marching, had joined Murat in his position, as if 
intending to give battle, turned sharply off to the left, down the 
Kalouga road, without any apparent reason, and marched into 
Fominsk, which had hitherto been occupied by Broussier. 
Dokhtourow's whole force consisted of Dorokhow's detachment 
and two less important corps under Figner and Seslavine. 

In the evening of the 11th (23rd), a French soldier of the 
Guards was brought in, having been taken prisoner; this man 
asserted that the troops occupying Fominsk composed the van- 
guard of the French army, that they had left Moscow five days 
since, and that Napoleon was with them. That same evening 
a peasant from Borovsk declared that he had seen a huge army 
entering the town. The Cossacks of Seslavine's detachment, 
who had seen the French regiments of Guards on the Borovsk 


260 


A French soldier of the Guards was brought in, having been taken prisoner 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


road, confirmed this account. Hence it was quite evident 
that the enemy in front was no longer, as had been supposed, 
a single division, but the whole French army, quitting Moscow 
and marching in am unexpected direction. 

Dokhtourow, though his orders were to attack Fominsk, 
hesitated what step to take, not being very clear as to what he 
ought to do in view of this fresh complication. Though Yermo- 
low urged him to come to some determination, he persisted in 
thinking it necessary to take further orders from the commander- 
in-chief. To this end a despatch was forwarded to head- 
quarters and confided to Boihovitinow, an intelligent officer, 
who was to supplement it by verbal explanations. After 
receiving the packet and his instructions, he set out, followed 
by a Cossack and two spare horses. 


CHAPTER LXXXVII 


THE autumn night was dark and mild. After riding thirty 
versts in an hour and a half, along a road ploughed into mud 
by four days of heavy rain, Bolhovitinow reached Létachevka 
at two in the morning, dismounted in front of a cottage sur- 
rounded by a dry hedge and wattled fence, on which hung a 
board bearing the words: “Headquarters.” He threw his 
bridle to the Cossack and went into an ante-room where it was 
perfectly dark. 

“The general on duty?" said he to a shade which started 
up at the sound of his voice. 

*He is very ill; for three nights he has had no sleep," 
inswered the drowsy voice of an orderly. 

* Well then, go and call the captain. I tell you it is most 
irgent; a despatch from General Dokhtourow," said the mes- 
enger, feeling his way through the half-open door, behind the 
servant who went in to wake the captain. 

“Excellency! Here is a courier." 

* What? What is the matter? From whom?" cried the 
aptain. 

“From Dokhtourow. Napoleon is at Fominsk,” said Bolho- 
yitinow, perceiving that the voice was not Konovnitzine’s. The 
aptain yawned and stretched himself. 

“I do not want to wake him, I must confess," said he. “He 
s not at all well, and it is only a rumour perhaps after all." 


261 


WAR AND PEACE 


“Here is the despatch. My orders are to deliver it imme- 
diately to the general on duty.” 

“Wait till I find a light. Where the devil do you always 
hide yourself?” he went on, speaking to the servant. “Stay, 
I have got it, I have found it!” he added, as his hand came 
against the candlestick. 

The speaker was Scherbinine, Konovnitzine’s aide-de-camp. 
By the light of the candle Bolhovitinow recognised him, and at 
the same time saw in the opposite corner of the room a bed in 
which lay another sleeper—the general himself. First burning 
blue and then red the sulphur match flared up. Scherbinine 
lit a tallow-candle on which the cockroaches had been feasting 
and examined the courier. Bolhovitinow was covered with . 
mud, and when he wiped his face with his sleeve he smeared 
the mud all the more. ~> 

* Who brought the news?” asked Scherbinine as he took the 
letter. 

“The news is correct enough,” said the other. “Prisoners, 
Cossacks, and spies, all say the same thing.” 

“Then we shall have to wake him,” and he went up to the 
sleeping man, who had on a cotton nightcap and was wrapped 
in his military cloak. 

“Piotr Pétrovitch!” he said softly, but Konovnitzine did 
not stir. "Wanted at headquarters!” he added louder and 
with a smile, knowing that the effect would be magical. 

In fact, the night-capped head was at once raised showing 
the grave, handsome face of the general, his cheeks scmewhat 
flushed with fever. The impression of his last dream—far 
enough no doubt from the reality—passed from his face like a 
lightning flash; he shivered, and was quite himself in an instant. 

"What is it? From whom?” he asked, without the slightest 
hurry. 

On hearing the officer’s story he opened and read the despatch. 
This done he turned and set his feet, in their worsted socks, on 
the floor, found his boots, pulled off his night-cap, combed out 
his hair, and put on his military cap. 

“How long have you been on the road? We will go at once 
to his highness.” 

Konovnitzine had at once perceived that the news was of the 
greatest importance. For good or for evil? He did not even 
ask himself. On the whole he little cared; he did not apply 
his reason or his wit to criticising the course of the war; he 
thought that quite useless. He was entirely convinced that it 


262 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


must come to a happy termination, and that the only thing 
needed to bring it about was that, each man should do his duty; 
and he did his own without respite or mercy. 

Konovnitzine, like Dokhtourow, is one whose name seems to 
have been placed on the list of the heroes of 1812 out of mere 
formality, with Barclay, Raievsky, Yermolow, Miloradovitch, 
Platow, and the rest. Reputation spoke of him as a man of 
limited capacity and knowledge; like Dokhtourow, he had 
never invented plans; but, like him again, he had constantly 
found himself involved in critical situations. Since his appoint- 
ment as general on duty he always slept with his doors open, 
and insisted on being roused whenever a courier might arrive. 
He was always the first in front of a fight, and Koutouzow's 
complaint was that he exposed himself to unnecessary danger; 
indeed, he avoided giving him a foremost position. In short, 
he and Dokhtourow were like cog-wheels in a machine, which 
make neither noise nor show, but are indispensable to its 
working. 

As he went out of his hut into the dark, damp night, Konov- 
nitzine knit his brows, partly because the air increased his 
headache, and partly because he could foresee the effect that 
this news would produce on the big-wigs of the staff—above 
all on Bennigsen, who, since the fight at Taroutino, had been at 
daggers drawn with the commander-in-chief. However, he felt 
that the crisis must come, though he could not help taking to 
heart the debates to which it must inevitably give rise. He went 
into Toll's lodgings as he passed by, to inform him of what had 
occurred, and Toll at once proceeded to lay down his views of 
what should be done, to a general who shared his rooms, till 
Konovnitzine, who was tired, and said little, reminded him that 
they must go to his highness. 


CHAPTER LXXXVIII 


Kovutouzow, like most old men, slept but little at night, and 
often dozed during the daytime. At night he lay down on his 
bed without undressing, and spent the time in meditation, his 
large scarred face resting on his hand, and his one eye gazing 
into the darkness. 

Bennigsen, who was the most influential officer on the «taff, 
and in direct correspondence with his majesty, had of late 


263 


WAR AND PEACE 


avoided the commander-in-chief, and Koutouzow had conse- 
quently felt more at ease, inasmuch as he thus escaped being 
constantly teased to attack the enemy at inappropriate moments. 
“They must see,” thought he, as he reflected on the lesson 
to be drawn from the battle of Taroutino, “that we can only 
lose by acting on the offensive. Time and patience are my 
two allies.” He was quite certain that when the fruit was ripe 
it would drop; he was certain, as an experienced huntsman, 
that the quarry was desperately wounded by the combined 
efforts of Russia—was the hurt mortal? The question was as 
yet unanswered. The sending to him of Lauriston and Ber- 
themy and the reports that reached him from all sides led him 
to think so, but he waited for proof positive. “They suggest 
manceuvres and attacks! What for? To gain distinction for 
themselves! It might be supposed that fighting was a delight- 
ful exercise. They are a parcel of children!” The unanswered 
question whether the wound given to the enemy at Borodino 
was mortal or not had been hanging over Koutouzow for a whole 
month. On one side there was the fact that the French had 
taken Moscow. On the other there was this feeling of certainty 
that the blow was fatal. But proof was wanting, and now for 
a month he had been waiting for this proof and growing more 
impatient the longer it tarried. Lying on his bed at night he 
did what he reproached the “young people” for doing—he 
imagined all sorts of possibilities, without basing any action 
upon them, it is true. Though he imagined thousands of 
possible moves for Napoleon, the actual move of the French 
army, its senseless, helpless throwing itself about from side to 
side for the first eleven days after leaving Moscow, he did not 
foresee. It made possible what Koutouzow did not even dare 
to think ori—the complete destruction of the French.. 
Dokhtourow's account of Broussier’s division, the reports 
brought in by the scouts, the misery the French army was 
enduring, the rumours of the evacuation of Moscow—all con- 
firmed him in his belief that the foe was beaten, and was about 
to retreat. But these were only suppositions, and in his eyes 
far less plausible than they might be in those of the “young 
people." His experience had taught him the untrustworthiness 
of hearsay, and he knew too how readily men incline to draw 
inferences that fit in with their desires, and to ignore everything 
that contradicts them. Now the more Koutouzow desired an 
event the less he allowed himself to believe that it could be 
at hand. It was his one thought; everything else was sub- 


264 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


ordinate and accessory, such as his daily avocations—among 
which he included his interviews with his staff, his correspon- 
dence with Madame de Staël and his St. Petersburg friends, 
the reading of -novels, and the distribution of prizes. The 
immediate defeat of the French, which he had been alone in 
predicting, was his only ardent wish. 

He was absorbed in such thoughts as these when he 
heard a noise in the adjoining room. Toll, Konovnitzine, 
and Bolhovitinow had just come in. 

*Hallo! who is there? Come in, come in. What news?" 
shouted the marshal. While a manservant lighted candles 
Toll told him the news. 

“Who brought it?” he asked with a cold severity which 
amazed Toll. 

* There is not the faintest doubt of it, highness." 

* Bring him in." 

Koutouzow had put one foot on the ground and was leaning 
back in his bed, his other leg bent under him. His eye, half- 
shut, was fixed on Bolhovitinow, trying to read the truth he so 
longed for in his face. 

“Tell me, speak out at once, my friend," he murmured in a 
low voice, and he drew his shirt together over his breast. 
*Come close. What is this pleasant little piece of news? 
Has Napoleon really left Moscow? Is it true?" 

The officer began to give him the verbal message entrusted 
to him. 

*Make haste, be quick; do not keep me in suspense," 
interrupted Koutouzow. 

The messenger finished his story, and then waited for orders 
in silence. Toll was about to speak but Koutouzow checked 
him with his hand, and tried to say something himself. His 
face twitched and he turned away to the side where the images 
stood. 

“Great God; my Lord and Creator! Thou hast heard my 
prayer! Russia is saved!" he said in a tremulous voice, 
clasping his hands. And then he burst into tears. 


265 


WAR AND PEACE 


CHAPTER LXXXIX 


From this moment till the end of the war Koutouzow resorted 
to every means in his power—orders, cunning, and even humble 
entreaty—to prevent the Russian army from acting on the 
offensive, and exhausting itself in futile struggles with a foe 
whose destruction was now inevitable. It was in vain that 
Dokhtourow marched on Malo-Yaroslavetz; Koutouzow delays 
his orders that the town of Kalouga should be completely 
evacuated, a retreat beyond Kalouga being apparently quite 
likely. Koutouzow retreats on every occasion, but the enemy 
without waiting for him to retreat flees in the opposite direction. 

Historians of Napoleon’s skilful manceuvres at Taroutino and 
Malo-Yaroslavetz, suggest a variety of hypotheses as to what 
would have happened if he had invaded the wealthy govern- 
ments of the south. They forget that not only was there 
nothing to prevent his going there if he had chosen; but that 
had he done so it would not have saved his army, the seeds of 
death were in itself. These latent elements of dissolution would 
have prevented his recovering his strength in the government 
of Kalouga, where the inhabitants were of the same mind as 
those of Moscow, just as much as in Moscow itself, where he 
had failed to maintain his footing notwithstanding the abun- 
dance of supplies which his men were trampling in the dust. 
The army was practically disbanded and bent on flying with its 
leaders—all alike, though they but vaguely understood the 
situation, were moved by the same desire to get out of a 
hopeless trap. 

At the council of war held, for form’s sake, by Napoleon at 
Malo-Yaroslavetz, General Mouton gave it as his advice that 
they should retreat as fast as possible, and no one contradicted 
him—no one, not even Napoleon himself attempted to dispute 
his opinion, At the same time, while they felt the imperative 
necessity of immediate flight, a certain sense of human self- 
respect made it desirable that some pressure from outside should 
render it obviously and indisputably needful. 

This pressure was soon felt. It was what the French called 
"Le Hourra de l'Empereur." The very day after this council 
of war Napoleon, having ridden out very early in the morning 
on a round of inspection with several of his marshals and his 
usual escort, was surrounded by a party of Cossack freebooters, 
and only escaped in consequence of that passion for plunder 


266 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


which had proved the ruin of the French themselves at Moscow. 
The Cossacks, tempted, as they had been at Taroutino, by greed 
of booty, paid no heed to Napoleon who had time to ride off. 
When it became generally known that these “Sons of the Don” 
might actually have captured the emperor in the midst of his 
army, it was evident that the only thing to be done was to get 
home by the shortest and most familiar road. Napoleon, who 
had himself lost some of his daring and energy, saw the whole 
bearing of this incident, and taking Mouton’s advice, gave the 
order to retreat. But his acquiescence and the homeward 
march of the troops do not at all prove that he instigated the 
movement: he acted under the influence of occult forces which 
the whole army was no less compelled to obey. 


CHAPTER XC 


Waen the French entered Russia, Moscow was to them the 
promised land: when they left it, the promised land was Home. 
But Home was very far away; a man who has a thousand versts 
to walk before he reaches his destination, is apt to say he will 
do forty in the day and rest at nights; the rest makes him lose 
sight of the distance that still parts him from the goal towards 
which all his hopes and wishes tend. 

Smolensk was the first point at which the French aimed on 
the road by which they had come; they did not hope, of course, 
to find reinforcements or fresh supplies there, but nothing but 
the hope of taking breath there for a moment, gave them 
strength enough to march on and endure their sufferings. 

Besides this common goal that bound all these troops into 
one body, there was another reason for their being as one— 
their vast number. This enormous mass by the laws of 
attraction, drew to itself the individual atoms. Each one of 
these soldiers had but one wish; that he might be made prisoner 
and so escape the miseries he was enduring; all were ready to 
seize every opportunity of laying down their arms, but such 
opportunities were rare; the rapidity of their march and the 
immense number of men made it difficult, and the internal lesion 
of this great body had only a limited effect in accelerating the 
steady process of dissolution. 

With the single exception of Koutouzow, none of the Russian 
generals understood what was happening. The superior officers 


267 


WAR AND PEACE 


were all fired with a desire to give chase to the enemy, to cut 
off their retreat, to crush them utterly; and all ranks clamoured 
to attack them. Koutouzow alone, put forth all his powers to 
thwart this desire—but the powers of a commander-in-chief 
are often as nothing in such a case; his immediate followers 
abused him and slandered him without mercy. Indeed, at 
Viazma, Yermolow, Miloradovitch, Platow, and some others, 
finding themselves in the vicinity of the French, could not 
resist the temptation to fight two of their corps. In sending 
to inform Koutouzow of their purpose, they contrived to enclose 
a blank sheet of paper instead of a letter; and the attack, 
which, as they declared, would bar the way to Napoleon’s 
retreat, took place in spite of all the commander-in-chief’s 
efforts to prevent it. Some regiments of Russian infantry made 
a rush forward with their bands playing, and some thousand. 
men were killed on both sides—but as to barring anyone’s way, 
no one was checked even. The ranks of the French army 
closed up, and losing a few stragglers by the way, it pursued 
its fatal march to Smolensk. 


BOOK FIFTEEN 


CHAPTER XCI 


In all history there are few more instructive episodes than the 
battle of Borodino, followed by the occupation of Moscow by 
the French, and their retreat without again showing fight. 

Historians are very generally agreed in saying that the 
reciprocal influence of nations in their collisions is expressed in 
war; and that their political power diminishes or increases in 
proportion to the military success they may be able to command. 

Strange indeed are the official narratives, which tell us how 
this or that king or emperor, having quarrelled with his neigh- 
bour, collects an army, fights that of his foe, wins the victory, 
massacres a few thousand men and appropriates a whole nation 
of many million souls. And it is certainly difficult to under- 
stand why the defeat of an army, that is to say of a hundredth 
part at most of a whole country’s forces, should entail its sub- 
mission; nevertheless, facts confirm the accuracy of views of 
the historians. If the army gains a great victory, the rights of 
the conqueror are at once asserted to the disadvantage of the 
vanquished ; if on the other hand it is beaten, the nation behind 
it, as it were, loses its right in proportion to the check it has 
suffered, and if it is entirely routed, submits entirely. It has 
always been so—at least so history tells us—from the earliest 
times to the present day, and Napoleon’s wars prove the rule. 
After the defeat of the Austrian army, Austria’s rights were 
abrogated, while France on the contrary gained; and the 
victories of Jena and Auerstaedt sealed the fate of Prussian 
independence. 

But in 1812 the French marched as conquerors into Moscow, 
and instead of striking a death-blow at the existence of Russia, 
the outcome was the destruction of their own army of 600,000 
men and, later, of Napoleonic France. And, say what we will, it 
is impossible to distort the facts to fit historical theory, to main- 
tain that the Russians remained in possession of the field of 
Borodino, or that after the French had left Moscow, they were 
cut up in a series of pitched battles! The whole course of 


269 


WAR AND PEACE 


the invasion of 1812, from the battle of Borodino, till the last 
Frenchman had recrossed the frontier, proves conclusively that, 
in the first place, a victory does not necessarily lead to conquest 
—is not even a sure promise of it, and, in the second place, that 
the power which decides the fate of nations is not inherent in 
conquerors, armies and battles, but has a quite different source. 

French writers have told us that, excepting in the cavalry, 
the artillery, and the baggage-trains, everything in the Grande 
armée was kept in perfect order; they admit that provender 
was lacking for the horses and beasts, but that for this there 
was no remedy, as the peasants burnt their hay rather than 
sell it. 

Hence it must be inferred that a victory had not its customary 
results, because the very peasants who after the departure of 
the French poured into Moscow to plunder the town—not, it 
must be said, a proof of any very heroic feeling—preferred 
burning their fodder to selling it to the invaders, notwithstanding 
the high price they offered. 

Suppose now, that two men are about to fight a duel with 
swords, by strict rule of fence, and suppose that one of them, 
finding himself very hard pressed, throws away his weapon and 
seizes a club wherewith to defend himself. Though he may, 
no doubt, have found the simplest means of attaining his end, 
if his chivalrous feeling still induces him to throw a veil over 
this breach of established rules, and to maintain that he has 
fought and conquered in due form, it is easy to see how confused 
the reports of such a duel are likely to be. The Frenchman is 
the duellist who insists on the combat taking place with proper 
formality and courtesy; the Russian is the antagonist who 
flings away the sword for the bludgeon; while the reporters, 
who try to account for the issue on approved principles, are 
the historians. 

In fact, after the evacuation of Smolensk, the war took a 
course which cannot be accounted for by any received tradition. 
The burning of the towns and villages, the retreat after each 
battle, the club hurled at the foe at Borodino, the pursuit by 
skirmishers, the guerilla warfare, all were out of the pale of 
cognisance of law. Napoleon, who had struck the correct 
duellist's attitude at Moscow, knew this better than any man, 
and he never ceased complaining of it to Koutouzow and the 
czar; but in spite of his remonstrances, and of the shame which 
some high personages may very possibly have felt at seeing 
the country fight in this fashion, the national bludgeon was 


270 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


lifted, and, without any question as to good taste or correct 
rule, fell and hammered the French unremittingly, till its 
stupendous brute force had utterly crushed the invasion. 

Happy the nation who, instead of handing the sword hilt to 
a generous conqueror, boldly seizes the first cudgel that comes 
to hand, without stopping to think what others would do in the 
same case, and then never lays it down till rage and revenge have 
given place to contempt and pity. 


CHAPTER XCII 


Onz of the most remarkable exceptions to the so-called laws of 
war, and one of the most important in its consequences, was 
beyond a doubt the independent action of individuals as directed 
against the dense masses of the enemy who occupied the country. 
This class of fighting is always developed in a national war; 
instead of combining in considerable troops the men divide into 
small parties, surprise the foe, and melt into nothing as soon as 
they are met by a superior force, only to resume the offensive on 
the first favourable opportunity. This was the course pursued 
by the guerillas in Spain, the mountaineers in the Caucasus, and 
the Russians in 1812. In calling it partisan warfare, an attempt 
is made to limit the meaning of the word ; since, in truth, it is not 
warfare strictly speaking, being in direct opposition to the rules 
of tactics which require that the aggressor should concentrate his 
forces so as to be stronger in attack than hisadversary. Partisan 
warfare, as history shows, is always successful, though in flagrant 
contradiction to this rule; and the contradiction has its rise in the 
theory held by strategists that the strength of an armed force is 
always in proportion to its number. The greater the number 
the greater the strength, says military science, consequently 
large battalions always win the day. But in defending such a 
proposition, military science is in the same kind of error as a 
theory of physics would be which, being based on the relation of 
force to mass, should regard the first as bearing a direct ratio 
to the second. 

But force is the product of the mass multiplied by the 
velocity. And in war the acceleration of the troops is also the 
product of the mass, but the multiplier is an unknown quantity. 

Military science, finding that history is full of instances in 
which the number of the troops was not the standard of effective 


271 


WAR AND PEACE 


strength, but that in many cases small detachments have been 
able to rout large ones, does vaguely admit the existence of an 
unknown quantity as the multiplier, and tries to find it in the 
mathematical precision of the plans adopted, in the mode of 
arming the men, or—more frequently—in the genius of the 
leader. But the results attributable to this multiplier still do 
not agree with the historical facts; to discover this unknown x 
we have only to give up once for all the hero-worship which leads 
us to ascribe extravagant importance to the measures taken by 
commanders-in-chief. 

This x is the spirit of the men, their greater or less eagerness 
to fight, to face danger; it is quite irrespective of the genius 
of generals, of a formation in two lines, or in three, or of the 
number of weapons borne by the men, whether clubs or muskets 
firing thirty shots a minute. Those who are most eager to fight 
will always be in the best condition for a struggle. The Spirit 
of the troops is the multiplier which, taking the mass as the 
multiplicand, will give the strength as a product. The real 
problem for the science of war is to ascertain and formulate its 
value, and it will never be able to do so until it ceases to substi- 
tute for this unknown quantity such factors as the commander’s 
plan, or the accoutrements of the soldier; then only, by express- 
ing certain historical facts by equations and comparing their 
relative value, can we hope to ascertain that of this unknown x. 

Ten men, say, or ten battalions fighting against fifteen men or 
fifteen battalions win the victory: that is to say, they kill or 
capture the others to the last man, losing only four on their 


side; thus 4x = 15y; or == i - This equation does not show the 


sum of the unknown quantity, but it shows the relation of the 
two unknown quantities, that is to say, of the warlike spirit— 
x and y—of the contending forces. By applying such a system 
of equations to various historical events: battles, campaigns, and 
the duration of wars—a series of numbers can be brought out 
which certainly include, and may be made to reveal new laws. 
The law of tactics which prescribes that masses should be 
moved to the attack, while a retreat demands sub-division, 
proves, without knowing it, that the strength of an army depends 
on the spirit that animates it. To lead men under fire requires 
greater discipline than to enable them to defend themselves 
against assailants ; now, discipline is most efficient over masses of 
men in movement. A rule which does not take into account the 
spirit of the troops most frequently results only in delusive 


212 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


estimates, in all cases when either extreme enthusiasm or great 
dejection has affected this spirit—as happens, for instance, in a 
national war. 

The French, instead of defending themselves in small detach- 
ments during this retreat, moved in compact masses; the spirit 
of the troops was at a low ebb, and only the strength of the mass 
could avail to protect the units. The Russians, on the contrary, 
who, by all the rules of tactics ought to have attacked in masses, 
became divided, for the spirit of the troops was over-excited ; 
single individuals even fought the French without orders, and 
exposed themselves without compulsion to the greatest fatigues 
and dangers. 


CHAPTER XCIII 


Tuis guerilla warfare had begun by the time the French had 
reached Smolensk in their retreat, before the Russian Govern- 
ment had officially recognised it; thousands of stragglers from 
the enemy’s ranks, of foragers and marauders, had been killed 
by the Cossacks and Russian peasantry, with no more remorse 
than if they had been so many mad dogs. Denis Davidow 
deserves the credit of having appreciated by patriotic instinct 
the task that was to be executed by the terrible bludgeon which, 
regardless of all military law and etiquette, was belabouring the 
French without mercy; and the honours of this type of warfare 
are due to him. It was on the 24th of August (Sept 5th), that 
Davidow’s first detachment of partisans was organised, and 
many others followed his example in increasing numbers as the 
campaign lingered to its end. 

These guerilla parties destroyed the Grande armée piecemeal 
and swept to perdition the dead leaves which dropped away 
from the perishing trunk. By the month of October, when the 
French were hurrying back to Smolensk, there were above a 
hundred of these detachments, varying in numbers and in 
character. Some had kept up the appearance of regular troops, 
had infantry and artillery, and the comforts and decencies of 
life. Others consisted only of Cossacks and cavalry; others 
again of a mixture of cavalry and infantry; while some were 
only parties of peasants and landowners, whose names remained 
unknown. A certain sacristan was reported to have led such 
a party, and to have made several hundred prisoners; and the 


25 


WAR AND PEACE 


wife of a starosta, a woman named Vassilisa had a good many on 
her conscience. This kind of fighting had spread to a vast extent 
by the middle of November, and that period, when the skir- 
mishers amazed at their own daring, expecting at any moment 
to be surrounded and seized by the enemy, lay hidden in the 
forests and never unsaddled their horses, was over. This kind 
of war had now defined itself ; it had become clear what could and 
what could not be undertaken against the French. Once fairly 
started, each man knew exactly what he could venture on. The 
small parties which were the first to dog the heels of the French, 
could do much which the leaders of larger corps could never have 
risked; and as to the Cossacks and peasants who crept into the 
very heart of the enemy's troops, they flinched at nothing. 

On the 22nd October (ard November), Denissow, who had 
thrown himself heart and soul into this guerilla fighting, was 
early on the march with his little corps. All day he had been 
stalking a considerable convoy of cavalry baggage and Russian 
prisoners, making their way to Smolensk under strong escort,— 
as his scouts reported. He and his men kept under cover of 
the forest that bordered the high road. Besides Denissow and 
Dologhow, who also had a small company in the immediate 
neighbourhood—other chiefs, those at the head of large troops, 
equipped with a regular staff were well aware of the existence of 
this baggage-train. Two of them, one a Pole and one a German, 
sent to ask Denissow, each on his own behalf, whether he would 
not combine with them to try to seize the plunder which all 
coveted: "No, thank you, my friend, I have teeth and nails of 
my own!" said Denissow to himself, as he read their letters; 
and he informed the German that, notwithstanding his wish to 
serve under so distinguished and valiant a chief, he could not 
have that honour, as he was already pledged to the Pole, while 
he told the Pole that he had promised his support to the German. 
Denissow had in fact made up his mind to lay hands on the 
booty, with Dologhow's help, without reporting matters to any 
superior authority. 

On the 22nd (November ard), the French convoy was moving 
from the village of Mikouline towards Schamschew; the forest 
that fringed the left side of the road came close up to it in some 
places, and here and there retreated to a distance of a verst. 
Here it was that Denissow and his men lurked, never losing 
sight of the movements of the French. Early in the day a party 
of Cossacks had been lucky enough to seize two fourgons loaded 
with saddles and harness, which had stuck in the mud. After 


274 


rilla warfare bad begun by the time the French had reached Smolensk 
in their retreat 


This gue 


c 
M AP-AND: 


S 
e 9 m 


hu ‘ } * — E a a . Th » - veuitih 
leve is la! Daas qua ! nét Turkesd; q« see 


siot 6l the £x»etmoanta idi ilm Dome, . miy arde 
viii f da idis du Ab n pirer An vut vi 
y » VN 2. À 

wich das a, wm Pee Pec ‘ie On om 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


this achievement they made no attempt to attack, for it was 
wiser to allow the whole convoy to reach the village of Scham- 
schew, where Dologhow was to arrive that evening, and wait in 
the forest till they joined him. Then they could fall on the 
French at daybreak from both sides at once, beat them, and 
carry off the stores. Six Cossacks were left along the high road 
to keep a good lookout, and give warning if other columns should 
be discovered approaching. Denissow had about 200 men with 
him; Dologhow about the same number, and they had reason to 
believe that the French escort was about 1500 strong; but these 
superior numbers did not alarm Denissow. One thing, however, 
it was indispensable that he should know: namely, what arms 
the escort bore; and for this purpose he must obtain information, 
that is to say, capture one of the enemy’s men. The two four- 
gons captured in the morning had been taken so completely 
by surprise, that the soldiers driving them had all been killed, 
and no one had been brought in alive but a little drummer who 
had lagged behind, and who could tell them nothing as to the 
character of the troops forming the escort. A second seizure 
would be rash, so Denissow, thought it better to send a peasant, 
Tikhone Stcherbatow, forward to Schamschew to capture, if 
possible, one of the quartermasters, who would certainly be 
sent in advance. 


CHAPTER XCIV 


Ir was a thorough autumn day, mild and raining; the sky 
and earth met on the horizon in one dull tint of grey. Some- 
times the rain fell in a fine mist, and sometimes in heavy drops. 

Denissow, mounted on a lean, light thoroughbred, and 
wrapped in a short felt cloak, with an astrakhan cap on his head, 
the rain streaming off him, bent his head to avoid the slanting 
showers; his steed, pricking his ears, did the same. The rider 
was peering uneasily into the distance, anxiety was written on 
his face, which had grown much thinner, and was covered with 
a short black beard. He was followed by a Cossack corporal, 
named Lovaiski, fair, with twinkling light eyes, dressed like 
himself in a cape and fur cap, and riding a stout Don pony, as 
straight as a lance, and with a stamp of calm firmness on his face 
and in his whole bearing. Though it would have been very 
difficult to define what gave this character to his appearance, 


275 


WAR AND PEACE 


it was evident at a glance that, compared with Denissow, who sat 
on his horse uneasily, Lovaiski seemed riveted in his saddle, and 
one with his beast. 

Their guide was a peasant, wet to the skin in his grey caftan 
and pointed, white woollen cap; he walked in front, and behind 
them, mounted on a fidgety, hungry-looking tartar horse with 
a thick mane and tail, and a mouth flecked with blood, came a 
young officer in a dark-blue, French military cloak. By his 
side rode a hussar, who had taken up the little drummer behind 
him. The lad, whose uniform and blue foraging cap were torn, 
clung to the soldier with his cold, red hands, and looked about 
him with bewildered eyes as he beat his bare feet against the 
horse’s haunches. By twos and threes hussars followed along . 
the narrow forest path, and Cossacks, some in capes, some in 
French capotes, some wrapped, head and all, in a cavalry 
housing. The drenching rain made the colour of the horses 
indistinguishable; bays and chestnuts alike looked black, their 
necks seemed curiously narrow with their clinging manes, and a 
thick steam rose up from their quarters and flanks. Riders, 
saddles, and bridles streamed with water, and looked all of a 
piece with the dreary faded aspect of the soil and the dead 
leaves that were strewn over it. The men sat close, their arms 
pressed to their sides to prevent as far as possible any fresh 
percolation of trickling rain to their skin; in the midst of the 
party rumbled the two waggons, drawn by French horses, with 
Cossack saddles, jolting over logs and roots, and plunging 
through the pools in the ruts. 

Denissow’s horse presently swerved to avoid a large puddle, 
and hit his rider’s knee against a tree: 

“Now, then! the Devil!” cried Denissow, in a rage, and 
flogging the beast smartly, he brought it round, splashing 
himself and his companions. 

Wet, hungry, and above all provoked at getting no news of 
Dologhow, and seeing nothing of the man he had sent forward, 
he sat grumbling to himself: “ We shall never have such another 
chance. It is too great a risk to try it single-handed, and if I 
put it off till another day, one of the regular detachments will 
carry off the plunder under my very nose... ." And he 
looked anxiously into the distance, in hopes of discerning, at 
last, Dologhow’s scouts. 

Suddenly coming out on a clearing, where a vista opened 
away to the right, Denissow, pulled up. 

“There is someone!” he exclaimed. 


276 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


The esaoul (captain of Cossacks) looked where he pointed. 

“There are two of them, an officer and a Cossack; and it 
can hardly be the lieutenant-colonel,” said he, with a love for 
using words not in use among his race. 

The horsemen they had seen came towards them down a hill; 
for a moment they were lost in a hollow, but soon reappeared. 
The officer, his hair blown about, his uniform in holes, his 
trousers worked up to his knees by his rapid ride, was spurring 
on his weary steed. A Cossack trotted behind, standing up in 
his stirrups. This officer was a mere boy, with rosy cheeks 
and bright eyes; as he came up he handed to Denissow a damp 
letter. 

“From the general!” he said. “Excuse its being so wet. 
They told us it was so dangerous,” he went on, turning to the 
esaoul, while Denissow, knitting his brows, broke the seal. 
“So I and my friend Komarow,” and he pointed to the Cossack, 
“took the greatest precautions. We each have two pistols. 
But what have you there?” and he looked at the little drummer. 
“A prisoner? Have you had a scrimmage already? May I 
speak to him?” 

“Rostow!” exclaimed Denissow. “Why, Pétia—why did 
you not tell me at once who you were?” And he held out his 
hand with a smile. 

All the way he had come Pétia Rostow had been making up 
his mind as to the line of conduct which, in his own opinion, 
he ought to pursue towards Denissow, as being becoming to an 
older man, and an officer, and ignoring all their past relations 
to each other. But at this affectionate greeting his face 
brightened and his cheeks flushed: forgetting in a moment the 
formal demeanour he had promised himself to maintain, he told 
Denissow how he had passed just in front of the French, how 
proud he was of the commission entrusted to him, and how he 
had already been under fire at Viazma, where a hussar had 
distinguished himself greatly. 

*I am very glad to see you!” said Denissow, but he was 
looking anxious again. 

*Michael Théoclititch," he said, addressing the esaoul. 
“This is from the German again; this young man is with him. 
He wants us to support him ;—so if we cannot grab this convoy, 
to-morrow he will be sure to get it... ." 

While he was consulting the Cossack, Pétia feeling much 
dashed by Denissow's inattention to him, and fancying that his 
rolled-up trousers might have offended him, was doing his best 


P 


WAR AND PEACE 


to work them down again, without attracting attention and to 
give himself a truculent air. 

"Have you any orders for me, highness?” said he, saluting 
in due military form, and putting on the airs of the general’s 
aide-de-camp, as he originally intended. “Oram I to stay here 
with your highness?” 

“Orders?” repeated Denissow, absently. “Look here, can 
you stay here till to-morrow?” 

“Oh! do keep me, I entreat you!” cried Pétia, eagerly. 

“But what did the general say? That you were to return 
immediately, I suppose?" — Pétia blushed. 

‘He did not say anything about it, so may I stay?” 

“All right,” replied Denissow, and turning to his men he bid 
them make their way through the wood towards a forester's - 
hut, which was the rendezvous agreed upon. Then he sent off 
the officer on the tartar horse, who did duty as aide-de-camp, to 
find Dologhow, and ask whether he would join him in the course 
of the evening, while he, with Pétia and the esaoul should go 
to the edge of the forest and reconnoitre the French position, 
which he hoped to attack next morning. 

“And now, old greybeard,” he said to the guide. “Take us 
to Schamschew." 


CHAPTER XCV 


Tue rain had ceased, but the branches of the trees hung heavy, 
and dripped with mist. Denissow, the esaoul, and Pétia silently 
followed the peasant, who walked briskly and noiselessly in his 
birch-bark shoes, paying little heed to the roots which lay across 
his path. At the top of a slope he paused, looked about him, and 
then made for a thin screen of trees; there he stood under a large 
oak not yet stripped of its foliage, and beckoned mysteriously to 
the others to join him.  Pétia and Denissow followed, and from 
thence espied the French. To the left, behind the wood, spread 
a field; to the right, beyond a hollow in the ground with scarped 
sides, stood a little village and a country mansion with the roof 
in ruins; in the village, around the well and the horse-pond, and 
along the road leading to the village, moving masses of men could 
be seen through the fog, and their shouts and adjurations in a 
foreign tongue could be distinctly heard as they urged their 
beasts up the hill or called across to each other. 


278 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


“Bring the prisoner here," said Denissow, in a whisper, 
without taking his eyes off the enemy. 

The Cossack got off his horse, lifted down the little drummer 
and brought him to the captain, who asked him what the troops 
were that he saw before him. The little lad, who had stuffed 
his frozen hands into his pockets, looked up at Denissow with 
frightened eyes, and got so utterly confused that, though he 
was very ready to tell what he knew, he could not bring out a 
word beyond a bare affirmation to every question asked him. 
Denissow turned to the Cossack, to whom he communicated his 
views. 

“Whether Dologhow comes or not, we must attack them,” he 
said. 

“Tt is a very good spot for the purpose," replied the esaoul. 

“We will get rid of the infantry down the slope towards the 
marsh; they will slip down as far as those gardens; you must 
come up on the other side, and then, at a given signal . . ." 

“But you cannot cross the ravine; there is a bog at the 
bottom,” said the esaoul. “The horses will never get out of 
it; we must go more to the left." 

While they were thus discussing matters in an undertone, 
they were startled by the crack of a gun; a puff of smoke rose 
into the air, followed by the cries of a hundred French voices. 
Denissow and his companion involuntarily started back, fearing 
that they were the objects aimed at; but the gun-shot and 
shouts were not for them: a red object was running at top speed 
across the marsh. 

*It is our Tikhone that they have caught sight of?" 
exclaimed the esaoul. 

* No doubt of it—the rascal!" cried Denissow. 

“Fe will get away from them,” said the Cossack. 

Tikhone had by this time reached the river; he plunged in 
head foremost, with such a splash that the water flew up on all 
sides, and after disappearing for a second, he scrambled out, 
dripping, on the opposite bank; the Frenchmen in pursuit 
stopped. 

* He is a sharp fellow, there's no denying!" cried the esaoul. 

«He is an ass!” said Denissow, crossly. ‘What has he been 
about all this time?" 

* What is it?" asked Pétia. 

“Our gunner. I sent him out to catch a straggler." 

“To be sure," said Pétia, with conviction, though he was 
none the wiser. 


249 


WAR AND PEACE 


This man, Tikhone Stcherbatow, one of the most useful 
members of their party, was a peasant from the village of 
Pokrovski. When Denissow went thither at the beginning of 
his raids, and had sent for the head man to question him as 
usual as to the movements of the French, the man replied—also 
as usual—that he knew nothing whatever about them. Denis- 
sow having explained to him that his object was to attack the 
French, and to know whether any had been seen in the village, 
the starosta confessed that the marauders had in fact passed 
through, and that Tikhone Stcherbatow, who was the only man 
there to trouble his head about such things, could give him 
information. Denissow sent for him, and on his arrival compli- 
mented him in the head man’s presence on his fidelity to the 
czar and his country, and on the hatred of the invader, which ` 
ought to dwell in every son of the soil. 

“We did the French no harm,” replied Tikhone, somewhat 
bewildered by Denissow’s address, “we only just amused our- 
selves a bit, as you might say; we killed a score or so of the 
plunderers, but beyond that we did them no harm.” 

Next day, when Denissow was starting again, a message was 
brought to him that Tikhone, whom he had quite forgotten, 
wished to join his detachment. He agreed, and Tikhone, to 
whom all the hard work was given at first—such as making the 
camp fires, fetching water, washing the horses, and so forth— 
soon manifested a great talent for this kind of warfare. He 
would go out on the prowl at night, and never come back 
empty-handed, bringing arms or uniforms, or even prisoners if 
he had been desired to do so. Then Dennissow relieved him of 
the dirty work, took him among his Cossacks, and made him 
follow him on his expedition. 

Tikhone did not like riding. He always went on foot, and 
never lagged behind the horsemen. He was armed with a 
carbine, but only for form’s sake, his weapon was a hatchet, 
which he wielded as skilfully as a wo!f uses his teeth—to crunch 
either a bone or a flea. He could split the stoutest beam in a 
straight line with a single blow, or cut out little pins, or carve 
out a spoon with equal ease. So Tikhone had a standing of 
his own among his comrades. If any difficult task was to be 
done—a strong heave of the shoulder given to a cart that had 
stuck, or a pull of the tail to a horse floundering in a bog—if a 
walk of fifty versts must be done in the day, or a man was 


wanted to creep in among the French—it was always Tikhone 
who must do it. 


280 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


“Why the devil not? it does not hurt him, he is as sound 
as a bell,” his comrades would say with a laugh. 

One day when he had taken a prisoner, the Frenchman 
managed to send a pistol shot through the fleshy part of his 
loins. This wound, which Tikhone treated himself with applica- 
tions—external and internal—of raw brandy, was a subject of 
inexhaustible pleasantry to the whole detachment, Tikhone 
lending himself very willingly to the jest. 

“Well, old fellow, so you are crook-backed for good now? 
No more games for you!” the Cossacks would say; and Tikhone, 
writhing and grimacing, made believe to be really angry this 
time, and swore at the French with comical vigour. The 
immediate result was that for the time he rarely took prisoners. 

No man was a better judge than he of a favourable oppor- 
tunity for a raid, no man had killed and rifled so many of the 
enemy ; consequently he was a favourite, both with the Cossacks 
and the hussars. Thus it was Tikhone, who had been sent off 
over-night to pick up information at Schamschew. Whether 
it was that he thought it beneath his dignity to capture a single 
Frenchman, or that he had slept too late, the fact was that 
having crept for cover at daylight into a copse, he had been 
detected there by the enemy, as his chief had been able to see 
for himself. 


CHAPTER XCVI 


AFTER discussing the attack to be made on the morrow with the 
Cossack captain, Denissow retraced his steps. 

“Now then, my boy,” said he to Pétia, “we will go and dry 
ourselves.” As they got near to the forester’s hut, Denissow 
stopped to look keenly about him. He saw coming towards 
him between the trees a man with legs like stilts, striding along, 
his arms swinging by his side; his short jacket, bast shoes and 
tartar cap were dripping wet; his gun was on his shoulder, his 
axe in his belt. On seeing Denissow he hastily threw something 
into the brushwood, and pulled off his cap as he approached ; it 
was Tikhone. His face, marked and seamed by the smallpox, 
and his little eyes were radiant with glee; he looked up, and 
seemed hardly able to keep from bursting out laughing. 

“Where did you lose yourself?" asked Denissow. 

“Where did I lose myself ? I went to look for the F rench- 
man,” he answered boldly, in a rather hoarse bass. 


281 


WAR AND PEACE 


“And what made you spend the day scrambling about in the 
brushwood, idiot? that was not the way to catch him.” 

“Catch him! I did catch him.” 

“ Where is he then?" 

“I caught one, as I tell you, on account as it were," and he 
straddled his big feet, “and I took him down into the wood— 
Then I saw he was no good; so says I to myself, *I must find 
another who will do the job better?" 

"So that was it; the rascal!" said Denissow, turning to the 
esaoul. “Why did not you bring him with you?” 

"Why not bring him?" said Tikhone roughly. *He was 
no good, I tell you. Do you think I don't know the man you 
want?” 

“Donkey! Well, what next?” 

“What next? I went to look for another one. I crept all 
along the wood, lying down so”—and he threw himself down 
on the ground to show how he had crawled—“and I came 
right upon my man. I jumped up and collared him”—and he 
suited the action to the word—'^and says I: ‘Come along, 
colonel!’ But he began to howl, and four men threw them- 
selves upon me with short swords, so then I showed them my 
hatchet. ‘What are you about,’ says I, ‘in God's name?’” 

“Oh, yes, we saw from the hill how they chased you across 
the marsh.” 

Pétia was dying to laugh, but as the rest kept their counten- 
ance, he did the same, though he could not make out what 
the meaning of it all was. 

“Don’t play the fool,” said Denissow, getting angry. “Why 
did you not bring in the first man?” Tikhone scratched his 
head with one hand and his back with the other, while his 
mouth, opening in a smile of idiotic complacency, showed his 
teeth and the gap that had earned him his name.! Denissow 
also smiled, and at last Pétia could enjoy his laugh. 

“But what am I to say? Have I not told you that he was no 
good? He was badly dressed and very rude into the bargain. 
‘What,’ says he, ‘I am a ganaral’s son myself, I won't go.” 

“Brute!” said Denissow, “I wanted to question him." 

“I questioned him,” said Tikhone, “but he said he did not 
know much, ‘and then,’ says he, ‘there are a great many of us, 
but a poor lot.’ Set up a shout and you may have them all," 
Tikhone concluded, fixing his eyes with a determined glitter on 
Denissow's face. 

1 Stcherbina or Stcherbinka, a gap or notch. 


282 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


“T will have you paid out with a hundred? all hot!” said 
Denissow, “to teach you to play the fool!” 

“What is the good of being angry?” said Tikhone; “you 
might think I did not know your Frenchman. Wait till it is 
dark, and I will fetch you three if you like.” 

“Come, come!” said Denissow, and he did not get over his 
ill-humour till they reached the forester’s hut. 

Tikhone followed quite in the rear, and Pétia heard the 
Cossacks laughing, and teasing him about a pair of boots he 
had thrown into the underwood. He understood now that 
Tikhone had killed the man of whom he had been speaking, 
and it gave him an uncomfortable feeling; he involuntarily 
looked at the little drummer, and something made his heart feel 
very full, but this weakness was but for a moment, he choked it 
down, raised his head, and began questioning the esaoul with 
an air of great importance as to the expedition in prospect, 
so as to keep himself on a level with the company he was in. 

The officer Denissow had sent to Dologhow met him on the 
road, and informed him that Dologhow himself was coming, 
and that on his part there were no difficulties whatever 
Denissow’s spirits rose at this news to their former pitch; he 
called Pétia to sit by him: 

“Well,” said he, “and now tell me what good work you 
have been doing.” 


CHAPTER XCVII 


Petra, on leaving his parents at Moscow, had joined his 
regiment, and had soon after become attached as orderly officer 
to the colonel in command of a considerable body of troops. 
Ever since this promotion, and above all since his introduction 
to active service at the battle of Viazma, he had been in a chronic 
state of happy excitement at the idea that now he was indeed 
a man; and his only fear was lest he should miss the smallest 
opportunity of covering himself with glory. Though greatly 
delighted with all he had seen and gone through with his 
regiment, it seemed to him that the greatest deeds of arms 
were always performed where he was not. So he implored the 
general, who wanted someone to go to Denissow, to trust him 
with his message. His chief consented; but, remembering 


1 Blows with a stick. 


283 


WAR AND PEACE 


Pétia’s foolhardy behaviour at the battle of Viazma—where, 
instead of following the road, he rode forward as far as the 
front line of sharpshooters under the French fire and discharged 
two pistol-shots—he forbade his taking any part in Denissow’s 
manceuvres. This was the cause of the boy’s hesitation when 
he had been asked whether he could stay: as far as the out- 
skirts of the wood Pétia had promised himself that he would 
strictly do his duty and return at once; but at the sight of the 
French, and after hearing Tikhone’s story, he made up his mind 
with the easy reaction of a youthfu! mind, that his general, 
whom till this moment he had greatly respected, was “only a 
rubbishy German;” that Denissow was a hero, and the esaoul 
another, and Tikhone a third; that it would be disgraceful to. 
desert them in peril, and that he would take part in the attack. 

It was dusk by the time they reached the forester's hut. 
Through the gloom moved the shadowy forms of the Cossacks' 
horses, saddled and bridled, and of the hussars pitching their 
tents in the clearing and lighting fires under cover of the hollow, 
that the enemy might not see the smoke. In the front room 
of the little hovel a Cossack, with his sleeves turned up, was 
cutting up some mutton, while in the inner room three officers 
were improvising a table out of a door taken off its hinges. 
Pétia pulled off his wet uniform and offered his services in 
helping to arrange the supper. In ten minutes the table was 
covered with a cloth, and spread with a bottle of brandy and 
one of rum, bread, salt, and broiled mutton. Seated with the 
other officers and tearing the tender, juicy morsels with greasy 
fingers, Pétia was in a state of childish excitement which made 
him feel kindly towards all men, and take their kindness for 
granted in return. 

"Do you really think, Vassili Fédorovitch," said he to 
Denissow, "that if I stay with you for a day I shall not get 
into hot water? For you see," he went on, arguing with him- 
self, *I was told to find out—and I shall be sure to find out if 
only you will let me go—go where there is most. Not for a 
prize or a reward, you know; but I really do want—” he set 
his teeth and tossed his head, and clenched his fist as he looked 
about him. 

“Where there is most—most what?" said Denissow with a 
smile. 

“Give me a command; just the smallest command, that is 
all I ask—it cannot matter to you, you know. Allow me, my 
knife is quite at your service," he went on, offering it to an 


284 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


officer who was trying to divide a slice of mutton. The officer 
thanked him and_praised the blade. 

“Keep it, pray, I have several. Oh! by the by, I quite 
forgot; I have some raisins with me, capital raisins too, with- 
out pips. There is a new sutler in our detachment and he sells 
wonderful things; I bought ten pounds; I am used to eating 
sweets—would you like some?” And Pétia ran off in search 
of his Cossack, and returned carrying a large basket of raisins. 
“Take them, gentlemen, don’t be modest. I wonder if you 
want a coffee-pot? I bought a famous one from our sutler— 
he is a capital fellow, and so honest, too, which is the chief thing; 
I will send it you without fail. By the way, do you happen to 
have plenty of flints? I have a hundred here that I bought 
quite cheap. Would you like to have them?” He stopped 
short, colouring consciously and fearing lest he had gone too 
far; he tried to remember whether he had committed any other 
folly in the course of the day; and as he thought over his 
adventures the face of the little drummer rose before him: 
“We are very snug here, but where have they taken him? 
I wonder if he has had anything to eat even? I hope they are 
not ill-using him. I have a great mind to ask. But what will 
they think? that I am a child who pities such another as 
himself. I willlet them see whether I am a child or not, to- 
morrow! Well, I don't care then, I will ask;" he looked 
uneasily round at the officers' faces, fearing to see that they 
were laughing at him, as he said aloud: 

* May I call that little prisoner, and give him some food?" 

“To be sure, poor little fellow!" said Denissow, who saw 
nothing to criticise in such humanity. “Call him in—his name 
is Vincent Bosse." 

“J will go and call him,” said Pétia. 

* Yes, do—poor little man!” i 

Pétia was already at the door, but turning round he squeezed 
his way between the other men up to Denissow. 

«I must embrace you for that," said he. “My kind friend. 
How good, how very good of you!” and then he rushed off 
into the next room shouting as loud as he could: “ Bosse, Vincent 
Bosse!" 

“Who is it that you want?" asked a Cossack, from the 
outer darkness. Pétia explained that it was the French 
drummer. 

* Ah! Vessenni?" said the Cossack, for the little fellow's 
name had already taken a Russian form, and the word, 


285 


WAR AND PEACE 


referring to the spring-time, seemed appropriate to the lad. 
"He is warming himself out there. Hi! Vessenni, Vessenni!’’ 
shouted several voices. 

“He is a sharp little fellow,” said the man standing near 
Pétia. “We gave him some food, he was starving.” They 
could hear the boy coming; his bare feet splashed through the 
ooze. 

“Here you are,” said Pétia. “Are you hungry? Do not 
be afraid, no one will hurt you; come in." 

"'Thank you, sir," said the young voice, and the drummer 
rubbed his muddy feet on the doorstep. 

Pétia longed to say many things to him, but he did not dare, 
so he only took his hand and pressed it kindly. g 

“Come in,” he repeated quite affectionately. “I wonder 
what I can do for him,” thought he, as he opened the door and 
pushed him into the room. But in spite of his charitable im- 
pulse he took a seat at some distance, fearing no doubt lest his 
dignity should suffer if he showed him too much attention. But 
he fumbled in his pockets, counting how much small change he 
had about him, and wondering whether it would be right to 
give it to the little drummer. 


CHAPTER XCVIII 


“VESSENNI,” after eating his share of the mutton, was dressed 
in a Russian caftan that he might not be sent to join the other 
prisoners; and Pétia's attention was soon diverted from him 
by the arrival of Dologhow. He had heard a great deal of 
Dologhow's bravery, and of his barbarity to the French, and 
from the time when he came into the room, he never took his 
eyes off him. 

Dologhow's appearance was striking to Pétia from its extreme 
simplicity. While Dennissow wore a tchekmen or Cossack 
pelisse, left his beard untrimmed, and displayed an icon of St. 
Nicholas on his breast. thus emphatically proclaiming the excep- 
tional character of his present mode of life, Dologhow, who at 
Moscow had chosen to make himself conspicuous by his Persian 
costume, was now got up with scrupulous correctness in his 
uniform of an officer in the Guards, with a clean-shaven chin, the 
Guards' wadded military cloak, the ribbon of St. George in his 
buttonhole, and the regulation cap set square over his brow. He 


286 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


tossed his wet riding cape into a corner, and marched straight 
up to Denissow without noticing anyone else. He plunged at 
once into business; Denissow explained what his plan was, and 
told him of the rival eagerness of ‘the larger corps; of Pétia’s 
embassy, his replies to the generals, and whatever he knew of 
the French convoy. 

“That is all very well, but we must find out of what the 
escort consists, and how strong they are,” said Dologhow. 
“Someone must go and see. Without knowing their numbers 
we cannot rush blindly forward. I like to be precise. One of 
these gentlemen, perhaps, will accompany me to the enemy’s 
camp? I could, if he liked, lend him a uniform.” 

*I—I will! I will go with you,” cried Pétia. 

“Tt is quite unnecessary,” said Denissow. “I will not allow 
him to go,” added he, turning to Dologhow. 

* Why not?" cried Pétia; *why may not I go with him?" 

* Because there's no necessity." 

“I will ask you to forgive me, but I am going, and that’s all 
there is to it. You'll take me won't you?" he said, addressing 
Dologhow. 

“Why not?" Dologhow repeated absently. He was looking 
at the little drummer. “Has that brat been with you long?" 

“Only to-day. But he knows nothing—I mean to keep 
him.” 

* And what do you do with the others?” 

“What do I do with them? Why I send them in and take a 
receipt for them,” said Denissow, colouring. “I may add,” he 
went on boldly, “that not one lies on my conscience. Why, 
what is the difficulty of sending thirty or even three hundred 
prisoners under escort to the nearest town? And is it not 
better, frankly speaking, than to stain one's honour as a soldier?” 

“Such squeamishness would be all very well in this sixteen- 
year-old count!” said Dologhow, with a frigid smile. “But 
you ought to have outgrown it by this time.” 

“But,” Pétia put in shyly, “I said nothing of the kind. I only 
want to go with you.” 

“I repeat it," Dologhow went on, taking pleasure in annoying 
Denissow, “we are too old for such fads. For instance, why 
have you kept that child? Because he moved you to pity? 
We know very well what the receipts are worth! You send off 
a hundred men and perhaps thirty arrive; they have died of 
hunger or been knocked on the head; it is far better to send 
none at all!” 


287 


WAR TANDIPEACE 


The esaoul, with a twinkle of his pale eyes, nodded 
approbation. 

“I do not hold myself responsible for that, so I need not 
discuss how far it is true. You say they die on the road? 
But, at any rate, I shall not have murdered them."  Dologhow 
laughed aloud. 

* Do you suppose that they have not their orders to grab us 
if they can; and if they catch us, do you think with all your 
beautiful chivalrous sentiments, that we shall escape the aspen 
trees? However, it is high time to be doing something," he 
added, after a short pause. “Tell my man to bring my baggage 
in. Ihave two French uniforms. So you are coming with me?” 
and he turned to Pétia. : 

“Yes, yes, it is a bargain!” cried the lad, colouring to the 
roots of his hair; he glanced at Denissow, whose discussion with 
Dologhow had suggested so many ideas that he scarcely knew 
exactly what had been said. 

“Still,” thought he, “if the captains think so I suppose it 
must be all right. And at any rate it will never do for Denis- 
sow to fancy that he can turn me round his little finger—" 
And in spite of his friend's dissuasion Pétia persisted that he 
knew his own business, and was afraid of nothing. 

“You yourself must see that it is indispensable that we should 
know the strength of the escort, since our lives depend upon 
it.—Besides, I particularly wish to go.—Do not detain me; it 
will be worse in the end." 


CHAPTER XCIX 


So, after putting on the French uniforms, including the shako, 
Pétia and Dologhow rode off to the clearing, whence Denissow 
had reconnoitred the French camp; then they went down into 
the hollow, where Dologhow ordered their Cossacks to wait for 
them without stirring, and he and Pétia trotted forward, along 
the road leading to the bridge. The night was pitch dark. 

“They will not take me alive, I swear; if they lay hands on 
me I have a pistol," murmured Pétia. 

“Hold your tongue; do not speak Russian!” said Dologhow 
hastily; and at the same moment a “Qui vive?” distinctly 
uttered, was heard a few yards off, followed by the click of a 
musket being cocked. 


288 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


* Lancers of the 6th,” cried Dologhow, without checking his 

ace. : 

The black outline of the sentinel was just visible in the middle 
of the bridge. 

“The password?” 

Dologhow drew rein and walked his horse. 

“Tell me, is Colonel Gérard hereabouts?” 

“The word?” repeated the man, barring the way and giving 
him no answer. 

“You don't ask an officer on his rounds the password! I 
want to know if the colonel is to be found ;” and pushing the man 
aside with his horse's shoulder, he rode on. 

Discerning another shade a little way off he went straight 
towards it; it was a soldier carrying a sack, who came up in 
perfect confidence and patted the horse’s neck. In reply to 
Dologhow’s questions he answered very frankly that the colonel 
and officers were farther up the hill, at the farm, as he called 
the house of the owner of the village. 

The men had bivouacked all along both sides of the road; 
without paying any heed to their laughter and shouts Dologhow 
stopped in front of a gateway, turned into the yard, dismounted, 
and went up to a large fire that was blazing in the middle. 
Some men were sitting around it talking vehemently ; a piece of 
meat was stewing in a small saucepan, and a soldier in a dark- 
blue cloak and foraging-cap was stirring it with his ramrod. 

“Fle is a famous one to cook!” said an officer who was sitting 
in the shadow on the further side. 

“THe will make the rabbits fly!” answered another with a 
laugh; but then they both were silent, peering into the darkness, 
as they heard Dologhow and Pétia approaching. 

“Ts that you, Clément? Where the devilsem o 

But he did not finish his sentence. Perceiving his mistake 
he frowned, bowed to Dologhow as a stranger, and asked him 
what brought him there. Dologhow explained that he and his 
companion wished to join their regiment, and begged him to 
tell him whether he knew where the 6th Lancers were to be 
found. The Frenchmen could tell him nothing about it; and 
to Pétia it seemed as though the officers were examining them 
suspiciously. The silence lasted some seconds. 

“Tf you expected to find supper you have come too late,” 
said a chuckling voice behind the stewpan. 

Dologhow said they had supped already, and that they were 
going at once; he threw the reins of his horse, however, to the 


289 


WAR AND PEACE 


private who was watching the pot, and sat down on his heels 
next to the officer who had spoken to him. The Frenchman 
did not take his eyes off him, and again asked him which was his 
regiment. Dologhow affected not to hear the question, but to 
be absorbed in lighting his pipe, and in questioning the other 
officers as to the safety of the roads, and whether there was any 
danger of meeting with Cossacks. 

“The rascals are ubiquitous,” said one of the Frenchmen; 
to which Dologhow replied that there was no danger from 
Cossacks, excepting to stragglers like themselves, that they 
would certainly not dare to attack any considerable detach- 
ment. To this no one made a reply. 

“When will he move off?” thought Pétia to himself; he. 
had remained standing. But Dologhow went on with the con- 
versation, asking them boldly how many men there were in 
each battalion, how many battalions in their escort, and how 
many prisoners. 

“It is dreary work dragging all those corpses at your heels. 
Far better shoot the wretches and have done with it!” he 
added, with such a shout of laughter that Pétia feared the 
Frenchmen might find them out. 

Dologhow’s laugh found no echo, and one of the French 
officers who had been lying invisible in the shadow, covered 
with a cloak, whispered a few words to his neighbour. Dologhow 
rose and asked for his horses. 

“Now, will they let us have them or not?” thought Pétia, 
keeping close to his leader. But the horses were brought. 

“Good-night, gentlemen,” said Dologhow. Pétia tried to say 
as much, but he could not utter a word. The officers were still 
whispering together. Dologhow was some time getting into his 
saddle, for his horse was restive; but finally he rode off, walking 
slowly out of the gate, Pétia following. The boy would have 
liked to look back and see whether they were being watched, 
but he dared not. 

Instead of returning as they had come they crossed the 
village, pausing for a moment to listen. 

“Do you hear?” said Dologhow; and Pétia recognised the 
voices of Russian prisoners, sitting round a fire. 

Then they went back to the bridge, past the sentinel, who 
did not say a word to them, and into the ravine where the 
Cossacks were waiting. 

“Now, good-bye; you can tell Denissow that I expect him at 
daybreak, at the first gun fired,” said Dologhow, moving away. 


290 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


But Pétia clasped his hand, exclaiming: “Oh! what a hero 
you are! How splendid! How much I admire you!” 

“ All right, all right!” said Dologhow; but as Pétia still held 
his hand he guessed that the lad was leaning over to embrace 
him. He submitted with a laugh, and then rode off into the 
night. 


CHAPTER C 


On returning to the forester’s hut Pétia found Denissow waiting 
in the outer room in the greatest anxiety, and blaming himself 
for having allowed him to go. 

“Thank God!" he exclaimed, “thank God! But devil take 
you, I have not had a moment’s sleep, thanks to you!" he added 
interrupting Pétia's enthusiastic narrative. “Go to bed; we 
have time yet for a nap." 

“I am not sleepy,” said Pétia, “and I know myself too well. 
If I go to sleep there will be no waking me; besides, I am not 
in the habit of sleeping before a fight." 

So he sat down and remained quiet, thinking over his adven- 
turous expedition and dreaming of the morrow, till he saw that 
Denissow was asleep; then he stole out of the cottage. It was 
still quite dark; a few drops of rain fell now and then, but he 
could make out the shape of the Cossack tents and of the horses 
picketed near; further off loomed the forms of the two captured 
fourgons, and in the hollow a fire which was slowly dying out. 
Several of the Cossacks and hussars were awake; the murmur 
of their voices reached his ear, and the munching of horses over 
their corn. Pétia went towards the waggons where the riding- 
horses were tied up and found his own, a stout nag from the 
Ukraine. 

‘Well Karabach, my boy,” he said, stroking his nose and 
kissing him, “well, we have work before us to-morrow!” 

“What, are you not asleep, master?” 

“No, Likhatckow—that is your name, I think? I have 
only just come in. We have been to call on the French.” 
And Pétia gave him a full account of the expedition, and told 
him why he had gone, and how, in his opinion, it was better 
to risk his own life than to let the whole detachment try at a 
venture. 

“But go and get a little sleep,” said the Cossack. 


291 


WAR AND PEACE 


“No, it is not my habit. By the way, are you supplied with 
good flints? I have brought some with me, and if you want 
any you can have them.” 

The Cossack put his head out from under the wagon to look 
more closely at Pétia. 

“T say this because it is my way to see carefully to every- 
thing. Others let everything go haphazard; they are never 
prepared, and they regret it. I don’t like that myself.” 

“Very true,” replied the Cossack. 

“And I want you to be good enough to sharpen my sabre, 
the edge is turned with . . .” but Pétia checked himself just 
as he was about to tell a lie, for the sword had never yet been 
sharpened. “Can you put an edge on it?” 

“Why not? Of course I can.” 

Likhatchow crept out, and felt in the saddle-bags; Pétia 
perched himself on the waggon to watch his proceedings. 

“Are all the men asleep?” he asked. 

“Some are, some not." 

“And where is the boy?” 

“Vessenni? He stowed himself in a corner at the door of 
the hut and fell asleep out of sheer fright." 

For a long time Pétia kept silence, listening to every sound; 
presently he heard footsteps, and a shade stood before him. 

“What are you sharpening, mate?" 

“A sabre for the master here." 

“A good idea,” said the man, who was himself a hussar. 
“Tell me, did we not leave a bowl over here?” 

“There it is, by the wheel.” 

"It will soon be daylight,” added the man, picking up the 
bowl, and he walked away, stretching himself as he went. 

Pétia’s fancy, meanwhile, had carried him away into a fairy 
land, where nothing at all resembled the reality. That large 
dark object a few yards away—was it really the forester’s hut, 
or was it not the entrance to a cavern leading down to the 
bowels of the earth, and that red gleam, the single eye of a 
monster fixed on him? Was this a wagon he was sitting on, 
or a high tower, from which if he were to drop he might fly 
during a whole day, or a month perhaps, without reaching the 
ground. He looked up at the sky; it was as fairylike as the 
earth: clouds, swept along by the wind, rushed across above 
the trees, leaving rents through which he could see the myriad 
stars in the infinite blue, which sometimes looked so far, far 
away, and sometimes seemed so near that he could reach it 


292 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


with his hand. He involuntarily yielded to sleep, closed his 
eyes, and swayed from side to side. It was still raining a little; 
the snoring of the sleeping soldiers, and the neighing of the 
horses mingled with the rasping of the whetstone on his sword- 
blade. Suddenly Pétia heard a delicious orchestra playing 
some unknown hymn of exquisite pathos and beauty. His 
musical instinct was as fine as Natacha’s, far beyond that of 
Nicholas, but he had never learnt a note, or even thought of it. 
These mysterious strains, suddenly filling his brain and soul, 
struck him as beyond everything poetical and intoxicating. 
The music grew clearer and louder. It was what a scientific 
musician would have called a fugue; but Pétia had not the 
faintest idea of what a fugue might be. The air, played first 
by a violin, was taken up by a horn in plaintive and seraphic 
tones, and before it was ended was lost in a chorus, where it 
rose again till it melted into a glorious ensemble—a grave and 
solemn chant of triumph and victory. 

“But I am dreaming,” said Pétia to himself, as he nearly 
rolled over; “my ears are ringing no doubt—or is this invisibie 
music at my beck and call? Come back, sing again!” He 
shut his eyes once more, and the tones of the hymn, coming 
nearer or dying in the distance, again fell on his ear. 

“Oh! how lovely it is!” thought he, trying to control the 
heavenly orchestra. “Softly, now softly. . . ." and the music 
obeyed. “And now quicker, more lively, all together!” and 
the sounds, swelling in volume, seemed to come from the depths 
of space. ‘‘Now, the voices!” ordered Pétia, and men’s and 
women’s voices, at first hardly audible, gradually rose to impres- 
sive power. The ring of the instruments mingled with this 
song of triumph, and with the drip of the rain, the grinding of 
the sabre, and the whinnying of the horses, but the grand 
effect was not for a moment disturbed. Pétia listened in rapture 
to the sublime harmony, and never knew how long it went 
on. He was still in this rapture, and only regretted that there 
was no one to enjoy it with him, when Likhatchow's voice 
suddenly roused him. 

“Here it is, highness; you can cut a Frenchman in half with 
it now!" 

Pétia roused himself. Dull daylight was showing between the 
bare branches, and the horses were gradually emerging from the 
gloom. He jumped down, took out a rouble, which he gave to 
the Cossack, examined his sabre, and slipped it into its sheath. 
The men were untying the horses, and examining the girths. 


299 


WAR AND PEACE 


“Here is the captain!” said Likhatchow, seeing Denissow, 
who called Pétia from the door of the hut, and gave the word 
to make ready to start. 


CHAPTER CI 


THE horses were saddled in no time, and everyone fell into his 
place. Denissow gave his last instructions to the party of 
infantry who were to lead the way, and who soon disappeared 
among the trees, splashing through the mire, and vanishing in 
the heavy mist. Pétia holding his horse by the bridle, was, 
impatiently waiting for the order to start. His morning wash 
had refreshed him; but his eyes still glittered with unusual 
brightness, and he shivered. 

“Well, is everything ready?” asked Denissow; the horses 
were led up, and after scolding his Cossack for not tightening the 
girths enough, he mounted. Pétia put his foot in the stirrup, 
his horse trying as usual to keep him from mounting; but once 
up, off he went as light as a bird, looking back to see the start 
of the long line of hussars. 

“Vassili Fédorovitch," said he, going round to Denissow’s 
side, “You will give me a little command—a little job—will 
you not?” 

Denissow, who at that moment had almost forgotten his 
existence, stared at him in surprise. 

“I only ask one thing of you,” said he sternly, “and that is 
to do as I bid you, and not to go where you have no business." 
And not another word would he say to him throughout the 
march. 

By the time they reached the skirts of the wood it was fairly 
daylight over the plain; Denissow gave an order to the esaoul ; 
the Cossacks filed past them one by one, and he followed them 
down the hill. The horses, slipping and clinging with their 
hind hoofs, soon brought their riders down into the hollow. 
Pétia, whose attack of shivering was becoming serious, rode on 
by his leader’s side. It was now broad daylight, and only the 
fog hid distant objects from their view. Denissow again rode 
ahead, and turning to the Cossack, nodded to him, and said in 
a low voice, “Fire the signal shot!” 

The Cossack fired, and at the same instant the horses were 
put to a gallop, while other shots rang out on all sides. Pétia 


294 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


flogged his horse, giving him his head, and flew forward, heed- 
less of Denissow, who was calling him back. He felt as though 
the signal had brought a flash of light, and that the day was 
as bright as at noon. He reached the bridge, which the 
Cossacks had already crossed, knocked up against a straggler, 
and galloped madly on again. In front of him men—French- 
men, no doubt,—were crossing the road from right to left; 
one of them slipped and fell under his horse’s feet. Further on 
a party of Cossacks had pulled up in front of a peasant’s cottage 
from whence proceeded a fearful shriek of distress. Pétia went 
closer, and his eyes fell on the pale face of a terrified French- 
man, clinging with both hands to the shaft of a lance that was 
pointed at his breast. 

“Hurrah, boys!” shouted Pétia, spurring his foaming horse, 
and riding up the street. 

Shots were being fired some little way off; Cossacks, hussars, 
and Russian prisoners in tatters, were rushing in all directions 
and yelling like mad. A young Frenchman, bareheaded, was 
defending himself with his bayonet against two or three hussars. 
By the time Pétia rode up he was overmastered. “Too late 
again!” thought Pétia. 

He made his way to the spot where the firing was briskest; 
there was fighting in the courtyard, where he and Dologhow 
had been the night before; the French had entrenched them- 
selves behind the hedges and clumps of bushes in the garden, 
and were firing at the Cossacks, who stood in a compact mass 
in the gate. Through the smoke he saw Dologhow’s pale face, 
shouting to his men: 

“Take them from behind. Infantry, do not stir!” 

“Not stir! Hurrah!” cried Pétia, and without a moment’s 
hesitation, he threw himself into the thickest of the fray. 

A volley rent the air, the bullets whistled round; Dologhow 
and the Cossacks forced their way in at the gate. Amid clouds 
of smoke the French could be seen throwing away their arms, 
or rushing to meet the Cossacks, while others went rolling down 
the hill to the pond. 

Pétia was still tearing round the courtyard; but instead 
of holding the bridle, he was waving both arms wildly in the 
air, and leaning heavily over on one side. His horse, suddenly 
coming on the smouldering brands of the fire, stopped short, 
and Pétia fell heavily. For a moment his hands and feet moved, 
his head was rigid. A bullet had entered his brain. 

A French officer came out of the house then with a white 


295 


WAR AND PEACE 


handkerchief at the end of his sword, and explained that 
they surrendered. Dologhow, dismounting, went up to Pétia, 
who was lying on the ground with his arms out. 

“Done for!” said he, knitting his brows, and he went forward 
to meet Denissow. 

“Killed?” cried Denissow, knowing at a distance, from the 
too familiar attitude, that Pétia must be dead. 

“Done for!” repeated Dologhow, as if he found a particular 
pleasure in using those words; and he went back to the prisoners 
who were crowding round the Cossacks. 

“We can leave him there,” he called out to Denissow, who 
did not answer. 

He had lifted Pétia’s head with trembling hands, and was _ 
looking at the poor, blood and mud-stained face. “I am fond 
of sweet things—these are capital raisins—take them all. . . .” 
The words irresistibly recurred to his mind; and the Cossacks 
looked on in amazement as they heard the short, hard breathing. 
almost like a dog's bark, that broke from Denissow's oppressed 
chest. He suddenly turned away and clutched convulsively at 
the railings. 

Among the Russian prisoners just rescued was Peter 
Bésoukhow. 


CHAPTER CII 


Tue French authorities had taken no steps to provide for the 
conveyance of the prisoners with whom Peter found himself. 
Since the 22nd of October (3rd N ovember) they were no longer 
with the corps that had escorted them out of Moscow. Part of 
the provision-train which, during the first few days, formed the 
rear of the moving army, was seized by Cossacks, and the rest 
had gone on in front. The artillery, which, to begin with, had 
taken the lead, had now given way to Marshal Junot's enormous 
baggage- wagons, under the escort of a detachment of West- 
phalians. The troops had marched in three columns, and in 
good order as far as Viazma, but the ranks were now broken ,and 
the disorder of which Peter had seen symptoms at the first stage, 
had now reached a climax. The road on both sides Was strewn 
with the carcases of horses; men in rags, and stragglers from 
every corps, sometimes came up with them, and sometimes fell 
behind. False alarms had several times occasioned wild panics; 


296 


lers from every corps sometimes came up with them, 


Men in rags and stragg 
and sometimes fell behind 


a) = EL 


= 


"NND ELI d- 


5 j v o z M 4 dw i^ - 
=. PSE i 
E ume , 


i DAA 24. 
i vi ! Walunih. Tio cd on buth sides wzs ptm. 


e f Si x praca ia REA, Ai Mh tss ragg lors trem 
= e EE c uuu m Societe Mei 
1 ' B is vit bucragionnd 9 Ue patirs. 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


then the soldiers fired at random, turned on each other, jostled 
and swore, abusing their comrades for their own crazy terrors. 

The cavalry-train and Junot’s baggage still formed some 
semblance of a body of troops, but day by day it was melting 
away. The hundred and fifty wagons were presently reduced 
to sixty; the rest had been seized or abandoned, and three of 
Junot’s wagons had been rifled by men of Davoust’s corps. 
Peter had heard the Germans say that this baggage-train was 
more strongly guarded than the prisoners, and that a West- 
phalian had been shot by the marshal’s orders for being found 
possessed of a spoon with his arms upon it. 

The number of prisoners had greatly diminished: from three 
hundred and thirty that had started from Moscow, they had 
dwindled to about a hundred, and they were a greater anxiety to 
the soldiers in charge than even the cavalry-train and Junot’s 
fourgons. If it was weary work to watch the baggage, it was 
far more tiresome and intolerable, starving and shivering as 
they were, to keep an eye on the Russians—who were equally 
hungry and cold, who died off like flies, and whom they were 
ordered to shoot if they made the slightest attempt to escape. 
Fearing to be betrayed into a sentiment of compassion which 
might cost them dear, they treated them more brutally than 
ever. At Dorogobouge, the soldiers locked up the prisoners in 
a stable, while they went off to plunder their own stores. Some 
of the victims tried to escape through a burrow underground 
that they managed to scrape out, but they were caught in the 
act and shot. The order at first observed, by which the officers 
were kept apart from the privates, had ceased to exist. The 
able-bodied were all placed in one party, and thus Peter found 
himself once more in company with Plato Karataiew and his 
little bandy-legged dog. Karataiew fell ill of fever the third 
day of their march, and as he grew weaker Peter instinctively 
held aloof from him, or only kept with him by a great effort, for 
his constant groaning and the peculiar acid odour of his person 
were to the last degree repulsive. 

While shut up in the hut at Moscow, from all that went on 
in his mind, and the mode of life to which he was forced, Peter 
had felt keenly that man is created for happiness; that that 
happiness is in him, in the mere satisfaction of the daily needs 
of life; and that misery is the foreordained result not of want, 
but of superabundance. Another new and consoling truth had 
also been revealed to him during the last three weeks: namely, 
that nothing in this world is wholly frightening, but that whereas 


297 


WAR AND PEACE 


there is no such condition in life where a man is perfectly happy 
and perfectly free, there is also no such state when a man is 
utterly unhappy and a complete slave. He saw that endurance, 
like freedom, has its limits, and that those limits touch each 
other; that a man lying on a bed of rose-leaves, of which one 
is crumpled, suffers as acutely as the man sleeping on the damp 
earth, who feels the cold creeping into his limbs; that he him- 
self, indeed, had suffered as much in his time from a pair of 
tight evening shoes as he did now from his bruised, bare feet. 
Finally, he had learned to see that he was no more free when 
he fancied he was marrying of his own free will, than he was 
at this moment, locked up for the night in a stable. 

Of all the miseries that weighed upon him at this moment, 
and which he never forgot till his dying day, the most intolerable 
was the state of his feet. Even the second day he said to 
himself, as he examined them, that it would be impossible to 
walk again next day; but when the order to start was given, he 
limped and shuffled till his cuts and bruises got warm, and 
then the pain was less severe. Though every night his feet were 
in a shocking state, at length he made up his mind to look at 
them no more, and then he forgot them. Never before had he 
at all understood the strength of man’s vital power of resistance, 
or the beneficial effect of change of scene, and the relief it gives, 
like the safety-valve of a steam-engine, which lets off the surplus 
when the boiler is too full. He never heard the prisoners shot 
who lagged behind, though above a hundred had already been 
thus disposed of. He thought no more about Plato, who daily 
grew weaker, and who would, no doubt, meet the same fate; 
still less did he think of himself. The more precarious his 
situation, the darker the future, the more comforting and peace- 
ful were his meditations, and the more his spirit dwelt apart from 
all that was immediately around him. 


CHAPTER CIII 


On the 22nd October (November 3rd), Peter was toiling up a 
muddy and slippery hill-road; his eyes, which were chiefly 
occupied in picking his way, wandered now and then to his 
companions in misery. The little dog frolicked along, some- 
times on three legs as of old, and sometimes, on all four at once, 
he would dart off to bark at the crows feasting on the carrion, 


298 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


There was plenty of it about, corpses of men, and carcases of 
beasts in different stages of decomposition. The wolves dared 
not approach while the troops were constantly passing, so the 
little dog was free to yield to his vagabond propensities. The 
rain had not ceased all day; if it held up for a few minutes, it 
was only to come down more sharply than ever after each 
interval. The earth, completely saturated, could take up no 
more, and the water ran off in a thousand little rills. Peter was 
counting off his steps on his fingers, and mentally saying to the 
rain: “Rain away, rain away; wet me through!” 

He would have said that he was thinking of nothing, but his 
spirit was alert and meditative, and deriving much edification 
from a story he had heard from Karataiew the evening before. 
Plato, wrapped in his cloak, had been telling the soldiers in his 
sing-song, and now weak voice, a legend which he had often 
repeated in Peter’s hearing. It was past midnight, and at that 
hour his fever left him, and he recovered his wonted spirits. 
Looking at the thin, pale face, in the glare of the bivouac fire, 
Peter’s heart swelled within him. His pity for the man made 
him uncomfortable, and he would have been glad to get away; 
but as there was no other fire for him to sit by, he had no choice 
but to remain by his side. 

“Well, and how are you?” he asked, without looking at 
him. 

“ Bewailing one's illness will not bring death!” was the reply, 
and Plato went on with his story. 

Peter, as we have said, knew it by heart. It was one that 
the little soldier took a particular delight in telling. Peter 
listened to it this evening with fresh interest. It was the 
history of a worthy old merchant, living with his family in the 
fear of God, who one day set out on a pilgrimage with one of 
his friends. They stopped for the night at an inn, and next 
morning the merchant’s friend was found murdered and robbed. 
A blood-stained knife was lying under the merchant’s pillow, 
and he was tried and condemned, beaten, his nostrils slit, and 
then sent into penal servitude, “as was but just," Karataiew 
added. 

“So, my dear friends, for ten years and more the old man 
toiled in the mines, and never did anyone any harm, but sub- 
mitted as he ought; but still he often prayed God to let him 
die. Well, one evening the convicts all sitting round, as it 
might be us here, began telling each other what they had 
been sent there for, and what their sins were before God. One 


299 


WAR AND PEACE 


confessed that he had murdered a man, another that he had 
killed two; another had set a house on fire, and another was 
a deserter; at last they asked the old man: ‘And you, grand- 
father, what were you punished for?’ ‘I, my children,’ says 
he, ‘for my own sins and for those of others. I never killed 
any man, nor stole his goods, and I gave what I could to my 
neighbour when he was poor. I was a merchant, my little 
friends, and very rich—’ and then he told them, chapter and 
verse, how it had all happened. ‘And I don’t complain,’ says 
he, ‘for it was God who sent me here no doubt; but I am sorry 
for my poor wife and children . . . And the old man began 
to cry. Well, and if the very man who had really committed 
the murder was not among them! ‘Where did it happen, 
grandfather? and when? and how?’ 

" And lo and behold! the man asks all these questions, and 
his heart grows full, and he goes up to the old man and falls at 
his feet: ‘It is for me, good old man, that you are punished; 
it is Gospel truth! he is an innocent soul, friends, who is 
suffering here. I struck the blow, and I slipped the knife 
under your pillow while you were asleep. Forgive me, grand- 
father, forgive me, for Christ’s sake!’” Karataiew paused 
with a pensive smile—and gazing into the fire he piled the 
logs together. 

“And the old man says to him: ‘May God forgive you, for 
we are all sinners together before Him; I am punished for my 
own sins . . .’ and he cried bitter tears." 

“Well, what do you say to that, my friends?" Plato asked, 
his smile lighting up his whole face, as if all the charm of the 
story was in the sequel. 

“The real murderer confessed to the authorities: ‘I have 
six souls on my conscience,’ says he—for he was a wicked 
wretch—‘but the old man troubles me most of all: I cannot 
bear that he should be so miserable on my account. So they 
wrote all he told them and sent the paper to the right persons. 
It was a long way off, and then the trial took some time, and 
all the papers to be made out—as it always does with the 
authorities; at last it got to the czar, and the czar gave an ukase: 
‘Set the merchant free and give him a present, as the authorities 
have decreed,’ and when the ukase came they looked for the old 
merchant. ‘Where is the old man?’ they ask, ‘the innocent 
man who is being punished? The czar’s ukase has come!’ 
and then they tried again to find him.” Here Karataiew’s 
voice grew tremulous. “But God's pardon had come quicker,” 


300 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


he went on. “He was dead! Yes, so it was, my friends 
And he relapsed into silence, though the smile lingered long 
on his face. 

It was the mystical sentiment of the story and the pathetic 
rapture on the soldier’s face that had filled Peter’s soul with 
vague and indescribable joy. 


1? 


CHAPTER CIV 


“Form in line!” said a voice in abrupt command. A sudden 
stir at once began amongst the soldiers of the escort and 
prisoners; it might have been supposed that they were awaiting 
some happy but solemn crisis. Orders passed to and fro, while, 
to the left of the party, a troop of cavalry, well mounted and 
dressed, rode by. A look of constraint was perceptible on 
every face in the expectation of the commander-in-chief; the 
prisoners were thrust into the background, and the soldiers 
formed in a line. “The emperor! The marshal! The duke!” 
A carriage with grey horses was driving at a swift pace immedi- 
ately behind the guard of cavalry. One handsome, calm, fair 
face struck Peter as particularly imposing among the escort. 
It was one of the marshals, whose eye fell for a moment on 
the colossal figure of this prisoner. He looked away again at 
once, but Peter fancied he could detect a movement of com- 
passion, which he vainly endeavoured to conceal. The general 
in charge of the convoy and baggage-train looked frightened; 
his face was red and he spurred his haggard steed to gallop 
behind the carriage. Then a few officers collected together and 
the soldiers gathered round them: “What did he say? What 
was it?" everyone was anxiously inquiring. 

At this moment Peter caught sight of Karataiew, whom he 
had not before seen that morning. He was standing with his 
back to a birch-tree. The pathetic expression his face had 
worn last night when he was telling the story of the man who 
had suffered innocently, had now an added look of sweet, calm 
gravity. His kind eyes were misty with tears and seemed to 
appeal to Peter, but Peter was afraid for himself; he dared not 
look and pretended he had not seen. As they were marching 
on again, however, he glanced back. Plato was in the same 
place by the roadside. Two French soldiers were standing 
near him, discussing something. Peter would not look; he 


301 


WAR AND PEACE 


went on, toiling up the steep slope. He distinctly heard a 
shot behind him—but then he remembered that the passing of 
the carriage had interrupted his calculation of how many stages 
they had still to march to Smolensk; and he began to count 
them again. 

Two soldiers, with one of the guns still smoking, ran past to 
join the ranks; they were both very pale and one looked at 
Peter out of the corner of his eyes; Peter looked at him, and 
remembered that this man, only two days since, had burnt his 
shirt when trying to dry it, to the extreme amusement of all 
the lookers-on. Then he heard the dog howling round the spot 
where Karataiew was sitting: “What is the matter with the 
beast, why is he howling?" said Peter to himself. : 

The soldiers who were walking on each side of him did not 
turn round, but they looked black and gloomy. 


CHAPTER CV 


AT the village of Schamschew the prisoners, the marshal's 
baggage, and the cavalry-wagons were all brought to a stand- 
still. The men squatted round the fires and cooking-pots, and 
Peter, after eating his allowance of horseflesh, lay down with 
his back to the blaze and slept as he had slept at Mojaisk, after 
Borodino. His dream was mixed in strange confusion with 
the reality, and a voice—was it his or another?— repeated the 
very same reflections he had then so clearly heard. “Life is 
everything; life is God. Everything has motion, and that 
motion is God. As long as there is life there is the happiness 
of recognising the existence of the Divinity. To love life is to 
love God. The most difficult and the most meritorious thing 
in life is to love it in spite of all its undeserved suffering.” 
“Karataiew!” Peter suddenly said to himself, ascribing these 
ideas to him. Then, in his dream, he saw a little old man 
whom he had long since forgotten, and who had been wont to 
give him geography lessons when he had been living in Switzer- 
land: “Wait,” said the old man, and he put a globe before him. 
This globe was alive, moving; it had no clear outlines marked 
upon it; the whole surface was covered with drops of water 
lying closely side by side, and these drops trickled about, some- 
times running together and sometimes sub-dividing to infini- 
tude; while trying to occupy the largest possible space they 
repelled or absorbed each other continually. "This is an 


302 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


image of life,” said the old professor. “How simple and how 
clear,” said Peter, “and how is it I never understood this 
before?” “God is in the midst and each drop strives to spread 
itself out so as to reflect Him better; it expands, it shrinks, it 
disappears and comes to the surface again—that is how Kara- 
taiew disappeared! Do you understand, my son?” said the 
professor. “Do you understand, by all that's holy?" cried a 
voice of thunder, and Peter awoke. 

He sat up and saw a French soldier who had just been shaking 
a Russian prisoner and who was now grilling a piece of meat 
stuck on to the end of a ramrod. His hairy, strong hands 
twirled the meat round and round with great dexterity, and the 
glare of the fire lighted up his tanned face and thick eyebrows. 

*Much he cares, the wretch!" muttered he; thé prisoner, 
was sitting a couple of yards off patting the little grey dog 
which wagged its tail contentedly. 

“He has followed us,” said Peter, “Plato...” but he 
stopped short, for the picture rose before his fancy of poor 
Plato sitting under the tree, with the shot he had heard, the 
dog’s howling, and the guilty, frightened look of the two 
soldiers who had passed him with the musket still hot—and 
Plato had been absent all the evening. It was dawning on him 
at last that Karataiew had been killed, when, without knowing 
how or why, he had a sudden vision of the balcony of his house 
at Kiew where he had once spent a summer evening with a fair 
Pole. Making no effort of mind to connect these widely dis- 
similar images he closed his eyes again, and the reminiscence, 
merging in his dreams with the fluid globe of the old professor’s 
hands, gave him such a sensation of respite and refreshment 
that he fancied he was gently sinking in deep waters, clear as 
crystal, which silently closed above his head. 


He was roused before sunrise by loud shouts and the discharge 
of musketry. 

“The Cossacks!” yelled a Frenchman, taking to his heels; 
and a minute later Peter was in the midst of his fellow- 
countrymen. 

It was long before he could understand what was happening ; 
cries of joy rose on all sides: 

“Friends! Brothers! Comrades!” the rescued soldiers 
were exclaiming, as they wept, and hugged the Cossacks 
and hussars who crowded round them, offering clothing to 
one, boots or bread to another. 


905 


WAR AND PEACE 


Peter stood sobbing, and as he could not utter a word in his 
agitation, he threw his arms round the neck of the first man he 
saw. 


Dologhow, standing at the door of the dismantled house, 
watched the exit of the disarmed Frenchmen, dusting his boots 
with his riding-whip. Still burning with indignation under 
their misadventure, they were discussing it vehemently among 
themselves: but as they passed him and felt the sinister chill 
of his cold, stern gaze, the words died on their lips. Ata short 
distance off stood his Cossack, counting the prisoners and 
scoring off the hundreds on the panel of the gate with a bit of 
chalk. 

" How many?” asked Dologhow. 

“Two hundred,” said the Cossack. 

“Files, filez!” 1 said Dologhow, who had already picked up 
the word from the French, and a relentless flash glittered in his 
eyes as they met those of a Frenchman. 

Denissow was standing with his hat off, and watched, with a 
dejected air, a party of Cossacks who were carrying Pétia’s 
body to bury it in a grave they had dug at the bottom of the 
garden. 


CHAPTER CVI 


AFTER the middle of November, when the cold had fairly set 
in, the retreat of the French assumed a tragical aspect. A 
number of men were frozen to death or were burnt in trying 
to warm themselves, while the emperor, kings and dukes went 
on their way in furs and carriages carrying off stolen goods; 
but the actual flight and demoralisation of the French army 
continued without any essential difference. 

Between Moscow and Viazma the 73,000 men—not including 
the Guards—who during the whole war did nothing but pillage, 
were reduced to 36,000. The Proportions continued to be 
mathematically the same: from Viazma to Smolensk, from 
Smolensk to the Bérésina, from the Bérésina to Vilna the 
French army steadily dwindled, irrespective of the cold or the 
pursuit of the Russians, or of other unforeseen difficulties 
taken singly. After Viazma the three divisions melted into a 


! Be off, look sharp. 


304 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


confused crowd and went on thus to the end. Berthier wrote 
as follows to the emperor—and the amount of licence which 
generals allow themselves in describing the situation of an 
army is well known: 


«I feel it my duty to inform your majesty of the state of 
your troops in the different divisions which have come under 
my observation under various circumstances during the last 
two or three days. They are almost disbanded. The number 
of men who march with the flags is a quarter, at most, of almost 
every regiment; the rest wander on in various directions, each 
on his own account, in the hope of finding food and escaping 
discipline. On the whole they look to Smolensk as the point 
where they may join again. During the last few days several 
have been observed to throw away their cartridges and arms. 

“Tn such a state of things, whatever your majesty's ulterior 
purpose may be, the interest of the service requires that you 
should rally the troops at Smolensk, and begin by getting rid of 
the non-combatants, such as men who have parted with their 
weapons, all useless baggage, and the material of the artillery, 
which is now quite out of proportion to the effective force. 
Besides this, some days of rest and provisions are indispensable 
to the men, who are worn out with fatigue and want of food; 
several have died these last few days on the road and in bivouac. 
This state of things is getting worse and worse, and there is 
reason to fear that unless some remedy be promptly applied, 
we shall lose all hold over the troops, in the event of a struggle. 

“November 9th, thirty versts from Smolensk.” 


On reaching Smolensk, the Promised Land of their hopes, 
the French fell to killing each other to snatch the food they 
wanted: they rifled their own provision magazines, and having 
effected these ravages, set forth again on their homeward march, 
not knowing where it would end or why they were going on 
again. Napoleon, the general who had never met his match, 
knew no more than they did. Still, and in spite of everything, 
he and his courtiers continued to observe the usual formalities 
in writing letters and reports, and issuing the order of the day. 
They called each other: “Sire, my cousin—Prince of Eckmühl, 
or King of Naples. . . . But all these documents were a 
dead letter. No one executed orders which it was impossible 
to carry out; and, notwithstanding this pomp of titles, each 
man felt that he had much to answer for, and that the hour 


305 


WAR AND PEACE 


of retribution had come. In spite of the care they seemed to 
be devoting to the troops each one in reality was thinking only 
of himself—of escaping as fast as he could and securing himself 
—if possible. 


CHAPTER CVII 


THE movements of the French and Russian armies during 
this retreat from Moscow to the Niemen, are like nothing so 
much as a game of blind-man’s-buff, in which two men are 
blindfolded, and one has a bell to ring, so as to let the other 
know where he may chance to catch him. At first he rings it 
boldly, without much fear of his adversary, but as the game 
gets closer he tries to steal away noiselessly, and generally, 
when trying to avoid the enemy, blunders into his arms. In 
the same way, during the early part of the retreat of the French 
along the Kalouga road, the Russians still knew where to find 
them; but when they had started again on the way to Smolensk, 
they held the tongue of the bell, and without suspecting the 
neighbourhood of Russians, came into collision with them now 
and again. One army was flying, the other pursuing; and 
owing to the precipitancy of the flight and the fatigue of the 
horses the chief method of finding out the whereabouts of the 
enemy—cavalry patrols—no longer existed. Moreover, owing 
to the rapid and constant change of position such information 
as was received was valueless. 

On leaving Smolensk the French had a choice of routes; it 
would be supposed that after remaining there for four days, 
they might have been aware of the advance of the enemy, and 
have combined for an effective attack ; but it was a disorganised 
mob, and rushed off in utter disorder, without plan or purpose, 
on the least safe road of all: that to Krasnoé and Orcha, thus 
retracing their steps in coming. Believing that the enemy lay 
behind them and not in front, they spread over such wide 
distances, that often there was a twenty-four hours’ march 
between the various corps. Napoleon led the flight followed by 
kings and dukes. The Russian army, thinking that Napoleon 
would keep to the right of the Dnieper—the only rational 
course to pursue—did the same, and came out on the Krasnoé 
road. Thus—as in blind-man’s-buff—the F rench found them- 
selves confronting the Russian van. After a moment of panic 


306 


Napoleon led the flight followed by kings and dukes 


d 
EL i 
um 

" 


— Beer un Eta 
I 


: TI Meo 
-p = e oat 
San inthe ihe b 
» a Pus icm * 


| bue a) en — 
LIN E zm 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


caused by this unexpected sight, they stopped; but almost 
immediately turned and continued their mad flight, abandoning 
all stragglers and their wounded. In this way, for three days 
in succession, the divisions of the viceroy, of Davoust and of 
Ney, each in turn came in front of the Russian troops. Neither 
thought of waiting for the others, but each, simply shedding 
their baggage, their artillery, and half their men, thought solely 
of escaping from the Russians by sneaking round their right 
flank under cover of the night. 

Ney, who had lingered to carry out the useless task of blowing 
up the walls of Smolensk, like a child who beats the floor that 
he has fallen on, was the last to come up. He rejoined Napoleon 
at Orcha with 1,000 men—all that were left of 10,000 under 
his command, whom he had left strewn all along the road with 
his guns and waggons, having been obliged to force his way 
during the night through the forest to reach the Dnieper. 
From Orcha to Vilna, it was the same game of flight and 
pursuit. 

The shores of the Bérésina were the scene of an appalling 
disaster: numbers of men were drowned, numbers more sur- 
rendered, while those who had the luck to get over started once 
more across country on their desperate march. As to the great 
captain their leader, he wrapped himself in furs, got into a 
sleigh and was off—leaving his companions in misfortune behind 
him. Some followed his example, while some allowed them- 
selves to be captured, or went to swell the long score of dead. 


CHAPTER CVIII 


As we consider how, all through this campaign, the French 
were rushing to their ruin, never bringing their operations in 
detail or the progress of their march within the scope of any 
strategic scheme, it is hard to understand how, in describing 
this retreat, historians can again bring out their theory of the 
impulsion of masses by a single will. But they have, in fact, 
written volumes to elucidate the remarkable arrangements made 
by Napoleon for the guidance of his troops, and to celebrate the 
military skill displayed by his marshals. They put forward the 
most specious arguments to explain why he selected as his line 
of retreat, the road he had already devastated on his march to 


307 


WAR AND PEACE 


Moscow, instead of taking advantage of those which led through 
districts still amply stocked with food. They praise his heroism 
at the moment when he was preparing to give battle at Krasnoé, 
and to lead the troops in person, saying to his suite: “I have 
played the emperor long enough; it is time now to play the 
general!"—and in spite of such generous words he turned to 
fly, leaving his army to its miserable fate. They depict the 
bravery of his marshals—of Ney, in particular, which consisted 
in struggling through a forest, spending a night on the banks 
of the Dnieper, and arriving at Orcha without his flags or his 
artillery, after losing nine-tenths of his men. Finally, they 
describe with complacent satisfaction every detail of the em- 
peror's departure, leaving the great and really heroic army 
behind him. 3 

This action, which in homely language would be plainly 
designated as cowardly, and held up to children as contemptible, 
our historians speak of as magnificent, and bearing the hall- 
mark of genius. And when they have come to an end of their 
arguments to justify an action diametrically opposed to all that 
human nature can accept as right and good, they gravely 
invoke the phantom Greatness, as if that could exclude our 
notions of right and wrong. If we could see things as they see 
them, there could be no wrong for the great; they could be 
blamed for no form of atrocity. "It is Great!" cry the his- 
torians, and that is enough. Right and wrong have no existence 
for them; there is no standard but what is great and what is 
not great; and what is great is to them the necessary attribute 
of certain men on whom they confer the title of Hero! 

As to Napoleon, wrapped in furs, and flying as fast as horses 
can carry him from the men he brought with him, and whose 
fate is now irrevocably sealed, he, too, can say to himself with 
calm conviction that “it is great!” And among all those who 
for fifty years spoke of him as “Napoleon the Great,” not one 
perceived that to admit that " greatness" is something outside 
the eternal laws of right and wrong is equivalent to recognising 
its meanness and moral littleness. As we see things, the 
standard of right and wrong given by Christ must apply to 
every human action; there can be no greatness where there is 
no singleness of heart, no kindliness, and no truth. 


308 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


CHAPTER CIX 


Wuar Russian of us all, as he reads the accounts of the end 
of the campaign of 1812, is not conscious of a vague but painful 
impulse of vexation? Does he not ask himself how it was that 
the Russian army, after fighting at Borodino—where it was 
inferior in numbers to that of the French—and after surrounding 
the enemy on three sides, could not cut off their retreat and 
make them all prisoners; are the French so much our superiors 
that, having surrounded them by greater numbers, we were 
unable to beat them? How could this have happened? History 
—or what calls itself History—tells us that we must look for an 
explanation to Koutouzow, Tormassow, and others, who failed 
to take certain essential steps at the right moment. But, if so, 
why were they not tried and punished? Even if we accuse 
them of such fatal oversight, it is difficult to understand, as we 
remember the position of the Russian troops at Krasnoé and 
the Bérésina, how they could fail to seize the whole French 
army—marshals, kings, emperor and all, if this were indeed, as 
we are told, what the highest authorities aimed at. Any 
explanation of such a phenomenon by suggesting hindrances 
on Koutouzow’s part is perfectly inadmissible, because, as we 
all know now, in spite of his firm determination not to act on 
the offensive, he found it impossible to oppose the desire of his 
troops, both at Viazma and at Taroutino. If it were true that 
the Russian authorities intended to cut off the retreat of the 
French army and capture it as one man, so that their purpose 
was in fact foiled by repeated checks, it is obvious that the 
French may pride themselves on the close of the campaign as 
a series of victories, and that Russian writers are wrong in 
speaking of it as a triumphal march for the national army; 
since, if they are logical, in spite of their poetical and patriotic 
enthusiasm, they must in that case admit that the French 
retreat from Moscow was a course of successes for Napoleon 
and of defeats for Koutouzow. 

However, national vanity apart, this inference contains a 
self-evident contradiction; these “victories” led to the destruc- 
tion of the foe, while the Russian “defeats” culminated in 
the redemption of the empire. The fallacy lies in the circum- 
stance that historians have been content to study events in 
the letters of emperors and marshals, and in official reports 
and narratives, and have falsely concluded that there was, in 


309 


WAR AND PEACE 


fact, a plan for cutting off Napoleon’s retreat and making vast 
numbers of prisoners. But such a plan never was made—never 
could have been made, for there was no reason for it. Moreover, 
it would have been impossible to execute, for Napoleon’s army 
fled with a precipitancy that was almost infatuation, thus 
hurrying of its own accord to the desired end. It would have 
been ridiculous to elaborate complicated manceuvres against 
scattered fugitives, most of whom died on the road ; and the 
seizure even of the emperor and the generals would only have 
hampered the pursuers in their movements. 

The idea of cutting off Napoleon's retreat would have been 
alike foolish and impracticable, for experience teaches us that 
the movement of a column during the course of a battle five 
versts off, never precisely coincides at any given spot with the 
plan laid down for it. It was all very well to propose for a 
meeting at a fixed place and hour between Tchitchagow, 
Koutouzow, and Wittgenstein—it was really improbable and 
impossible; Koutouzow himself was conscious of this when, on 
receiving the plan forwarded to him from St. Petersburg, he 
said that schemes laid at a distance never led to the results 
that were expected of them. The expression “cut off a retreat” 
is, in itself, simply nonsense; you may cut off a slice of bread, 
but you cannot cut off an army. Say or do what you will, an 
army cannot be cut off, or even barred on its way; there is 
always some way of getting round, and theoretical tacticians 
may learn from Krasnoé and the Bérésina how darkness favours 
unexpected moves. Prisoners, again, are not taken unless they 
mean to be; like the swallow that can never be caught unless 
it perches on your hand, or like the Germans who surrender in 
due form by all the rules of strategy and tactics. The French 
probably thought there was not much to be gained on either 
side, for whether fugitives or prisoners they had no prospect 
before them but death from cold and starvation. 

The Russian army had lost 50,000 men in sick and stragglers, 
on the march from Taroutino to Krasnoé, without fighting a 
single battle. During this period thay lacked provisions, shoes, 
and clothing; for months they slept on the snow under fifteen 
degrees of frost; ! the daylight lasted only seven or eight hours, 
the nights seemed endless; discipline was at an end, since each 
man was constantly engaged in a mortal struggle against death 
and suffering. And so historians tell us that Miloradovitch 
ought to have executed a flank movement on one side, while 

1 Réaumur—about -1° Fahrenheit. 


310 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


Tormassow did the same on the other, and that then Tchitcha- 
gow would have advanced—through snow above his men’s 
knees!—to demolish the enemy. Why do they not rather tell 
us that these men, dying of cold and hunger, did all that was 
possible or necessary for the glory of their nation? It was no 
fault of theirs if meanwhile some other Russians, comfortably 
ensconced in warm studies, chose to amuse themselves by con- 
cocting impracticable schemes. The strange and inconceivable 
discrepancies between the events as they happened and the 
official records arise from the mania among historians for 
describing the sublime demeanour or pungent sayings of certain 
leaders instead of giving a prosiac tale of facts. Miloradovitch’s 
fine speeches, the rewards heaped on this or that general for his 
brilliant strategical combinations, are all they care about; the 
50,000 men strewed in the hospitals and country churchyards 
escape their notice as being unworthy of their learned research. 
But in truth, is it not simply by setting aside reports and 
plans of battle, by studying with a curious eye the molecular 
movement of the millions of individuals who are the immediate 
agents that we find a solution as clear as daylight of questions 
which have hitherto appeared insoluble? 


311 


BOOK SIXTEEN 


CHAPTER CX 


WHEN a man sees the death of an animal, however humble, 
an involuntary horror creeps over him, for he beholds the 
destruction of a particle of that animal nature by which he 
too lives; but when the death is that of a fellow-creature 
whom he loves, besides his terror at the sight of this destruc- 
tion, he undergoes an internal rending and wounding of the 
soul. And this wound may kill, or, like any other wound, it 
may heal; but it is always sensitive and shrinks from the 
tenderest touch. 

Princess Maria and Natacha both went through this anguish 
when Prince Andrew died. Their spirits had bowed, crushed 
under the sinister cloud of death that had so long hung over 
their head, and now they dared not look life in the face; they 
could only find such courage as might enable them to protect 
that still bleeding wound against the painful friction from out- 
side. The smallest thing—the rattle of wheels in the street, 
the announcement that dinner was ready, the maid’s inquiry as 
to what dress they would wear, or, worse still, a commonplace 
remark, a feeble expression of interest—irritated them, for it 
interrupted them in their contemplation of that mysterious 
Beyond of which for an instant they had caught a glimpse. It 
jarred on the deep peace which was so needful to their souls, 
and in which they could hearken to the chants of the solemn 
and awful choir which had left its echoes in their imagination, 
They spoke little to each other, but it was a real consolation to 
them to be together; they avoided all allusion to the future, 
to their sorrow, to the dead; for speaking even was a violation 
of the grandeur and sanctity of the mystery they had witnessed. 
This reserve, it is true, only added keenness to their grief; 
but grief, like joy, cannot be eternal or unqualified. 

Princess Maria was the first to look beyond the circle of woe 
in which, for nearly a fortnight, she had lived and moved. 
Her responsible and independent position, and her duties as 
guardian to her little nephew, rendered it necessary. A letter 
came which must be answered; Nicholas’ room was damp and 


312 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


he had caught cold; Alpatitch arrived from Yaroslaw with 
accounts to be looked into,-and so forth. He advised her to 
return to Moscow and settle in the house there, which had not 
been injured, and only needed some trifling repairs, and this 
had to be considered and discussed. Daily life must run its 
course; nothing can stop that. Painful as it was to Princess 
Maria to tear herself from her contemplative solitude and to 
leave Natacha alone, a prey to her regrets, the duties of her 
position claimed her. She did violence to her feelings and 
returned to active life; looked through the accounts with 
Alpatitch, held council with Dessalles over the child, and began 
her arrangements for returning to Moscow. 

Natacha, now utterly lonely, held aloof from Maria, as soon 
as she had decided to go home; the princess proposed that 
Natacha should accompany her, and her father and mother 
eagerly agreed; for seeing their daughter grow perceptibly 
weaker, they hoped that change of air and the advice of the 
Moscow doctors might improve her health. 

“I will go nowhere," replied Natacha, “I ask only one thing 
and that is to be left in peace!" and she went quickly out of 
the room, hardly able to restrain her tears of anger rather then 
of pain. 

She was hurt by Princess Maria's desertion, and spent most 
of her time alone in her room, sitting in a corner of the sofa 
and idly playing with anything that fell under her hand, while 
her eyes were fixed on vacancy and saw nothing. This solitude 
wearied her, wore her out, but she could do nothing else. When 
anyone entered the room she started up, changed her position 
and the expression of her face; snatched up a book or a piece of 
work, and waited with marked impatience till she was left to 
herself again. She felt as though she were constantly on the 
very verge of discovering the secret of the awful problem on 
which ali the powers of her soul were concentrated. 

One day, at the end of December, she was half lying, as 
usual, in the corner of the sofa, mechanically puckering the 
ends of her sash. She was pale and thin now; her hair was 
loosely knotted up at the top of her head, and she wore a black 
stuff gown. Her eyes were fixed on the door as though on the 
spot where he had vanished. That unknown shore of life of 
which, till lately, she had never thought, that shore which had 
always seemed so far away and so doubtful, was surely nearer 
to her; it was visible, almost within reach, and the ground 
where she still stood was a desert, barren, vacant, full only of 


313 


WAR AND PEACE 


grief and tears. Looking for him where she knew that he must be 
she could not picture him otherwise than as she had seen him 
during those last few weeks: she saw his face, heard his voice, 
repeated his words, and added others which he could fancy she 
had said. There he is! Leaning back in his deep chair, in his 
wrapper of fur-lined velvet, his head resting in his slender trans- 
parent hand; his chest sunk, his shoulders pushed up, his lips 
pinched, his eyes strangely bright, while faint wrinkles come 
and go on his pale forehead. One of his knees is trembling she 
can see: he is struggling with some intense pain. “What pain 
is it? What can he be feeling?” she wonders. He had noticed 
her fixed gaze; he looks at her and says without a smile: “To 
be tied for life to a man always in pain is a horrible fate ; eternal 
torment—” And he seems to try to read her heart. Then she 
replies, as she always used to reply: “It will not go on for ever; 
you will get better—” His stern scrutiny is full of reproachful 
meaning. “What I said," thought Natacha to herself, “was, 
that it would be dreadful if he were always to suffer thus, and 
he gave a wrong meaning to my words: I said it for him, and 
he thought I meant it for myself—for he longed to live then and 
dreaded death. I spoke without thinking, or else I should have 
told him that I should have been happy to watch him always 
suffering, always dying, rather than feel as I do now!—and now 
it is too late to set it right—he can never know now!” 

Then fancy repeated the scene from the beginning, and now 
she answered differently: “Yes, horrible for you, but not for 
me; for you know you are everything to me—even to suffer 
with you is joy to me!” Then she felt the pressure of his 
hand, she heard herself pouring out words of tenderness and 
devotion which she had never uttered then, but that she could 
speak now: “I love you, I love you!” she repeated, wringing 
her hands, and her pain became even less bitter as her eyes 
filled with tears. Suddenly she asked herself in terror, to whom 
she was speaking. “Who was he? Where is he?” Every- 
thing became confused; a fearful apprehension checked her 
effusiveness, she fell again into a reverie—at last, surely at last, 
the mystery would be solved. 

But at the very moment when it seemed within her grasp, 
Douniacha, the maid, hurried in with a scared face, and without 
thinking of Natacha’s indignation at the intrusion, exclaimed: 

“Come, miss, come quickly, something dreadful has hap- 
pened! ... Peter Illitch—a letter! . . ." and she burst into 
sobs. 


314 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


CHAPTER CXI 


NaTACHA'S aversion for all society was most marked towards 
the members of her own family. Her father, her mother, and 
Sonia, were so familiar and so near to her, that all they said 
had a false ring in the ideal world in which she lived. To them 
she was not merely indifferent, but repellent. She listened to 
Deuniacha’s words without understanding them. “What 
dreadful thing? "What can have happened to them?—their 
lives go on day after day in easy contentment!” 

When she went into the drawing-room, she saw her father 
coming out of the countess's bedroom. His face was streaming 
with tears, and as he saw his daughter, with a gesture of utter 
despair, he broke down into heart-breaking sobs, that distorted 
his kind, placid face. 

* Pétia—Pétia! Go to her, she wants you.” Crying like a 
child, and hardly able to drag his trembling legs, he dropped 
into a chair and hid his face in his hands. 

Natacha felt as though in that instant an electric shock 
flashed through her from head to foot, and sent an acute pain 
to her heart; something seemed to crack within it, and she 
thought she was dying, but this agony was immediately followed 
by a sense of deliverance. The torpor that had weighed upon 
her was gone. The sight of her father, her mother's wild cries 
of bereavement, made her forget her own woes; she hastened 
towards her father, but he signed to her with a feeble eftort to 
go to the countess's room. Princess Maria had just come to 
the door, and was standing there pale and quivering. She 
seized Natacha by the hand and tried to say something, but 
Natacha neither saw nor heard; she pushed her aside and flew 
to her mother's side. There she stopped an instant, as if 
struggling with herself. The countess, lying back in an arm- 
chair, was twitching hysterically every muscle and beating her 
head against the wall; Sonia and the maids were holding her 
hands firmly clasped. 

“Natacha!” cried the countess, “it is not true. It is false— 
Natacha!" And she pushed away the others. “Tell me that 
it is not true. Killed! Ha, ha, ha. It's not true!” 

Natacha knelt down on a footstool and leaned over her 
mother; then, raising the drooping head, she pressed her cheek 
closely against her mother's face. 

“Mamma, darling—I am here, I am with you," she 


ots 


WAR AND PEACE 


murmured again and again, and throwing her arms round her 
she held her firmly but lovingly, putting pillows to support her, 
making her swallow a little water, and unfastening her dress. 

“T am here—mamma, I am here,” she went on, kissing her 
hair, her face, and her hands, though blinded by the torrent of 
her own tears, which streamed down her cheeks. 

The countess clasped her daughter’s hand, closed her eyes, 
and for a moment was calmer. Suddenly raising herself with 
an effort, she looked about her with haggard eyes, and seeing 
Natacha, took her head in both hands, clenching them with all 
her might; then, while she held so tightly as to hurt her, she 
stared in her face with a look of wild bewilderment. 

“Natacha, you love me?” she whispered in a confidential 
tone. “You will not deceive me, you will tell me the truth?’ 

Natacha’s eyes, dim with tears, seemed to be craving 
forgiveness. 

“Darling mother!” she said, putting forth all her filial feeling 
to console her mother in some degree for her terrible misfortune. 
But the cour tess was unable to realise the truth, still refused 
to believe that she could survive when her adored son had been 
killed in the flower of his youth, and her struggles to escape the 
dreadful reality drove her into the phantasy of delirium. 

Natacha could never have told how they got through that 
first night and the following day. She never slept or quitted 
her mother for an instant. Her faithful and patient devotion 
made no attempt at comfort or explanation, but wrapped the 
unhappy mother in an emanation of tenderness that was like 
a summons back to life again. The third night, while she had 
taken advantage of an interval when her mother was dozing to 
close her eyes, with her head resting on the arm of the chair, 
she was roused by the bed creaking, and started awake to see 
the countess sitting bolt upright, and saying in an undertone: 

“How happy I am to see you back. You are tired? Will 
you have some tea?” 

Natacha went to the bedside. 

“How tall and handsome, Maria, you’ve grown!” the countess 
went on, taking her daughter’s hand. 

" Mamma—what are you saying?” 

“Natacha! He is dead, he is dead! I shall never see him 
again!" And falling on Natacha’s neck she burst into tears 
for the first time. 


316 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


CHAPTER CXII 


Ir was in vain that Sonia and the count tried to take Natacha’s 
place. She was the only person who could keep her mother 
from sinking into a state of despair verging on insanity. For 
three weeks she never left her, sleeping in the arm-chair by the 
bedside; she gave her food and drink, and was always ready to 
soothe her with gentle and loving words. 

This poor soul’s wound could not heal. Pétia's death had 
bereft his mother of the dearest part of her life. A month later 
the woman who at the time of her son’s death carried the burden 
of her fifty years lightly and vigorously, crept out of her room 
old and broken, half-dead, and indifferent to everything in life. 
The blow that had stricken her so heavily had, on the contrary, 
roused Natacha from her lethargy: Natacha had thought that 
life was at an end for her, till this output of affection for her 
mother had shown her that the real essence of her being, her 
power of loving, was still alive within heri; and love once 
revived in her soul she too came back to life. 

The last days of Prince Andrew’s life had closely knit Natacha 
and Maria, and now this new disaster bound them still more 
together. Princess Maria postponed her departure, and devoted 
herself to nursing Natacha, whose strength had been too severely 
tried in her mother’s sick-room, and who had now fallen ill in her 
turn. Seeing one day that she was shivering severely, Princess 
Maria carried her off into her own room, made her lie on the bed, 
drew down the blinds, and was about to leave the room when 
Natacha called her back: 

“I am not sleepy, Maria; stay with me." 

“But you are very tired; try to sleep.” 

“No, no. Why did you bring me away? She will ask 
for me.” 

“No, my pet; on the contrary, she is much better to-day.” 

Natacha, lying on the bed, was examining Maria’s face in the 
dim light: “Is she like him?” she thought. “Yes and no. 
There is something odd, peculiar to herself about her; but she 
loves me I am sure, and her heart is goodness itself. But what 
does she think—what is her opinion of me?” 

“Macha,” she said timidly, drawing her towards her. “Do 
not think me quite bad—no, my little soul, I love you dearly, 
indeed I do; let us be friends, real, perfect friends.” And she 


217 


WAR AND PEACE 


covered her face and hands with kisses. Princess Maria, though 
surprised and embarrassed, responded warmly to this effusiveness. 

From that day forth they had for each other that lofty and 
passionate friendship which is only found between women. 
They would kiss apropos of nothing at all, and call each other 
by loving names, and spent the chief part of their day together. 
If one went out or away the other was ill at ease, and was not 
happy till they were together again. Each was more at peace 
with herself when they were together than when they were 
apart; it was a bond stronger than friendship, and so close that 
life without each other seemed unendurable. Sometimes they 
would sit together in silence for hours, or else, sharing the same 
room, would chatter all night through till daylight. Their 
remotest memories were their favourite theme. Princess Maria 
would tell long stories of her childhood, of her early dreams, 
and speak of her father and mother; Natacha, who had hitherto 
shut her eyes with proud indifference to this life of devotion and 
submission, of poetical and Christian self-sacrifice which was 
beyond her comprehension, now that she cared so tenderly for 
her friend, fell sympathetical'7 in love with her past life, and 
began at last to understand the secrets of her experience which 
had so long been a sealed book to her. She, it is true, never 
thought of practising in her own person this absolute self- 
negation; she was accustomed to seek enjoyment in other 
ways; but she appreciated the virtue none the less for not 
possessing it. 

As to Princess Maria, as she listened to Natacha's recollec- 
tions of her childhood she caught à glimpse of horizons she had 
never known, of faith in life and in the Joy of mereliving. Of 
him they spoke but rarely so as not to desecrate—for that was 
their feeling—the loftiness of their associations ; but this deter- 
mined silence by degrees, in spite of themselves, was doing the 
work of oblivion. 

Natacha had become quite pallid, and she was so weak that 
it was a sort of pleasure to her when she was asked about her 
health: but suddenly a revulsion came over her, and a dread, 
not of death but of feebleness, and of losing her good looks. 
Looking at herself in the glass she was amazed to see how much 
she had altered as she sadly studied her features: “It could not 
be otherwise!” said she to herself; and yet it frightened her 
and filled her with regret. One day having walked upstairs 
rather quickly, she was out of breath; she immediately made an 
excuse to go down and come up again; she wanted to try and 


318 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


measure her strength. Another day, when she called Douniacha, 
she found her voice was weak. Though she could hear the girl 
coming she called- again, as loud as she could, taking a deep 
breath, as she used in singing, and listened to the ring of her 
own voice. Though she did not suspect it, and indeed would 
not have thought it possible, beneath the thick mould under 
which she believed that her soul was buried, the tender sprouts 
of a new spring-time were already stirring, soon to pierce the 
soil and cover with fresh verdure the grief that had overwhelmed 
her. The wound was healing from inside. 

Princess Maria started for Moscow at the end of January, 
taking with her Natacha, for the count insisted on her having 
medical advice. 


CHAPTER CXIII 


AFTER the collision between the two armies at Viazma—where 
Koutouzow had found it impossible to restrain the eagerness 
of his troops to overthrow the enemy and interrupt his retreat 
—the flight of the French, and the pursuit by the Russian con- 
tinued without any more pitched battles. The flight of the 
French was, indeed, so headlong that the Russian army could 
not keep up with them; the artillery-horses dropped exhausted 
on the road, and the Russian soldiers themselves, worn out by 
this constant pace of forty versts a day, could not go any faster. 

Some idea may be formed of the deplorable state of the 
national army from the following facts: ever since Taroutino 
it had lost in killed and wounded no more than 5000 men, of 
whom hardly a hundred had been taken prisoners; and when 
it reached Krasnoé it was reduced to about half of the effective 
force of 100,000 men which had started from Taroutino. The 
swiftness of the march had, therefore, a no less fatal effect on 
the Russians than their flight had on the French; with the 
difference, however, that they were advancing of their own free 
will, not crushed like the enemy, by the utter dejection at the 
prospect of destruction; and that stragglers were hospitably 
received by their fellow-countrymen, while the French who 
failed to keep up fell into the hands of their foes. 

Koutouzow devoted all his energies not to the hindrance of 
the French retreat, but to promoting it, on the contrary, and 
to mitigating the advance of the Russian troops. After the 


319 


WAR AND PEACE 


fatigue and losses they had suffered, yet another reason im- 
pelled him to moderate their ardour: the only hope of forcing 
the French onward in their disorderly course was by keeping at 
some distance in the rear. Koutouzow knew, as every Russian 
soldier knew, that the invaders were conquered beyond retrieval 
by the sheer force of circumstances. But his generals, and 
especially the foreign ones, were still burning with a desire for 
personal distinction—to capture a duke or a king—and were 
bent on hitting on a favourable moment for forcing a pitched 
battle, though nothing could be more absurd. Hence they 
were consistently besieging him with schemes which could only 
result in more harassing marches, and increased fatigue for the 
men; while Koutouzow's sole purpose, steadfastly pursued from 
Moscow to Vilna, was to spare the soldiers as much as possible 
in the miseries of this campaign. But, in spite of his utmost 
efforts, he was impotent to set a check on the ambitions that 
were seething all round him, and which came to a head when, 
quite unexpectedly, the Russian army fell upon the retreating 
foe. 

This was what happened at Krasnoé, where, instead of a fray 
with a single French column, they came upon Napoleon and 
16,000 men. It was impossible for Koutouzow to save his 
troops from a terrible but useless conflict; the slaughter of 
the undisciplined and laggard French by the exhausted Russians 
lasted for three days. Toll wrote out an order of disposition 
of the troops, and as usual nothing was done in accordance 
withit. Prince Eugene of Würtemberg shot down flying French- 
men from the top of a hill and called for reinforcements which 
never came. The French creeping round the Russians at night, 
scattering, hiding in the woods, made their way forward each 
man as best he could. Miloradovitch, who claimed to know 
nothing about the economic part of his troops, the chevalier 
sans peur et sans reproche as he liked to call himself, was 
constantly sending messengers to the French to demand their 
surrender, and acted contrary to the orders he received. “I 
give you this column, my lads," he would say, riding up to his 
troops and pointing at the French. And his cavalry after 
flogging and spurring their weary horses into a trot would ride 
up to the “‘gift”—a mob of frost-bitten, starved Frenchmen— 
and the "gift" would throw down their arms and surrender as 
they had for a long time been longing to do. Numbers of 
prisoners were taken, with some cannon, and a stick which 
was at once dubbed “a marshal's baton." Everyone might 


320 


A mob of frost-bitten, starved Frenchmen 


"E 
REAC 
IND | 

$ - 

ws 


MR 
eren de 


Cen 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


believe that he had distinguished himself. After the engage- 
ment, however, there was a great hubbub. Everyone blamed 
everyone else for not having captured Napoleon, or at least one 
of his marshals. These men, blinded by their passions, were, 
after all, no more than the instruments of inexorable necessity, 
though they flattered themselves that they were heroes, and 
were firmly persuaded that they had behaved with consummate 
nobility and distinction. Koutouzow was the special object of 
their animosity; they accused him of having from the first 
prevented their beating Napoleon, of thinking solely of his 
interests, of having checked the march of the army at Krasnoé, 
only because he lost his head on hearing of his presence there, 
of collusion with him, even of having sold himself to the French 
emperor, and much besides. 

Nor did his contemporaries only judge him thus, under the 
immediate influence of violent feeling; history and posterity 
also, while giving to Napoleon the surname “Great,” have 
vilified Koutouzow. Foreigners have held him up as a cunning 
old man, a corrupt and senile courtier; Russians have described 
him as a nondescript creature, a sort of puppet, useful in his 
day, thanks to his thoroughly Russian name. 


CHAPTER CXIV 


In 1812 and 1813 he was loudly abused. The emperor was 
dissatisfied with him, and in a certain history, written not long 
since, under high authorisation, Koutouzow is spoken of as an 
intriguing courtier and a knave, quaking at the mere name of 
Napoleon, and capable of blundering to such an extent as to 
prevent the actions at Krasnoé and the Bérésina from being 
splendid victories. Such is the fate of those who are not 
ticketed “great men”; such is the fate of those isolated indi- 
viduals who divine the designs of Providence, and submit 
to its decrees—the mob must punish them for having under- 
stood those supreme laws by which the affairs of this world are 
governed, pursing them with envy and obloquy. 

It is a strange and terrible fact; but Napoleon, that 
infinitesimal tool in history, who at no time, not even in exile, 
showed any manly dignity, is the subject of endless enthusiasm 
and wonder to the Russians themselves; he is “great” even 
in their eyes. 


321 


WAR AND PEACE 


But compare him with Koutouzow, who, in 1812, from first 
to last, from Borodino to Vilna, was never once false to him- 
self in deed or speech, who is an unprecedented instance of 
self-effacement, who could foresee with such amazing keenness 
the bearing of immediate events and circumstances on those of 
the future. And they represent Koutouzow as a colourless 
being, worthy at most of pity, speaking of him generally with 
an ill-disguised feeling of shame! But where, let us ask, is an 
historical personage to be studied, who has aimed more per- 
severingly at a single end, or attained it more completely, and 
in a way more absolutely in accordance with the will of his 
whole nation? 

He never talked of “the forty centuries looking down on his 
soldiers from the height of the Pyramids,” of the sacrifice he 
had made to his country, of his “schemes or his objects!’ 
Still less did he talk of himself. He played no part; on the 
surface he was a plain-spoken, simple man, saying nothing of 
any mark, writing to his daughters, and Madame de Staél, 
reading novels, liking the company of pretty women, joking 
with his generals, officers, and men, and never contradicting 
opinions that were opposed to his own. When Count Rostop- 
chine accused him in the most personal terms for having 
abandoned Moscow, and reminded him that he had promised 
not to give it up without a struggle, Koutouzow replied: 

“That was what I did.” But Moscow was, in fact, already 
abandoned! 

When Araktchéiew came to tell him, from the czar, that 
Yermolow must be appointed to the command of the artillery, 
Koutouzow said: 

“That is what I have just been saying,” though a moment 
before he had said the very contrary. 

What did he care—he who, alone of all this helpless crowd, 
appreciated the vast issues of the event—whether he or Count 
Rostopchine were held responsible for the misfortunes of the 
capital? And above all, of what moment to him was the 
appointment of this or that colonel of artillery? 

In these circumstances, as in all others, the old man who, 
through a long life, had learnt by experience that words are no 
true motive power of human deeds, often said things which had 
no sense—the first that came into his head. And yet this man, 
who attached so little importance to words, never uttered one 
throughout his public career which did not conduce to the end 
he had in view. 


220 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


Sometimes, however, involuntarily, and notwithstanding his 
melancholy conviction that he should not be understood, he did 
give distinct expression to his opinions, and on the most dis- 
similar occasions. - For instance, did he not maintain, whenever 
he spoke of the battle of Borodino, which was the first cause 
of differences between himself and his fellow-officers, that it 
had been a victory for the Russians? He said it, he wrote it, 
and he repeated it to his dying day. Did he not assert that 
the loss of Moscow was not the loss of Russia? In his reply 
to Lauriston, did he not declare that peace was impossible so 
long as it was in opposition to the desire of the nation? Did 
not he, singly and alone, all through the retreat, regard man- 
ceuvring as absurd, feeling certain that everything would come 
to a natural conclusion even better than we could hope for: 
that.what we had to do was to make a “golden bridge” (an easy 
retreat) for the retiring foe: that the engagements at Taroutino, 
Viazma, and Krasnoé were unnecessary: that as many men as 
possible must be saved to reach the frontier, and that he would 
not sacrifice one Russian for ten Frenchmen? 

He, who has been described to posterity as a courtier who 
could lie to Araktchéiew to gratify the czar, was the only man 
who dared at Vilna to say in plain terms that to prosecute the 
war beyond the frontier was aimless and exhausting, thus in- 
curring the imperial displeasure. But what need is there to 
affirm that he saw the critical importance of the situation: his 
actions are ample proof: he began by concentrating all the 
strength of Russia before coming to blows with the enemy; 
he beat him, and finally drove him out of the country, miti- 
gating, as far as in him lay, the sufferings of the army and of 
the population. He, whose motto was always: “Time and 
Patience”—he, the sworn foe of vigorous effort—he it was 
who fought the battle of Borodino with unwonted solemnity of 
preparation, and who afterwards persisted, in contradiction to 
the opinion of other generals, and in spite of the forced retreat 
of his victorious army, in declaring that it was a Russian 
victory, and in denying the need for fighting any more; who 
refused to recommence the war, or to set foot outside the 
frontiers of the empire. 

How was it that this veteran could so surely guess, in opposi- 
tion to everyone else, what the upshot and issue of events must 
be from the Russian point of view? His marvellous intuition 
had its source in the patriotic feeling which thrilled in his soul 
with intense purity and passion. This the people understood ; 


323 


WAR AND PEACE 


this it was which led them to demand his appointment, in spite 
of the czar, as the representative leader of a national war. 
Called by popular acclamation to this high office, he exerted 
his utmost powers as commander-in-chief not to hurry men to 
death, but to spare them, and save them for their country. 

This simple and unpretentious figure—“great” in the true 
sense of the word—could not be cast in the false mould of the 
European Hero, the so-called “Potentate of the nations," as 
history has sketched him! There can be no great men for 
lackeys, since lackeys insist on measuring all men by their own 
standard, 


CHAPTER CXV 3 


Tue 17th of November was the first day of the battle of 
Krasnoé. Shortly before dusk, after endless discussions and 
delays, caused by generals who did not reach the places where 
they could act with effect in proper time, and after sending 
aides-de-camp in every direction with orders and countermands, 
it became evident that the enemy were retiring, and that a 
battle was out of the question. 

The day was fine and cold. Koutouzow, with a numerous 
suite, among whom malcontents were in a majority, and riding 
his stout little white horse, went to Dobroié, whither the head- 
quarters had been moved by his orders. All along the road 
the French prisoners taken in the course of the day—about 
7,000—were huddled round camp fires, and as they approached 
Dobroié, a crowd of prisoners in ragged clothing were talking 
veheinently over some French guns that had been unharnessed 
and seized. As the commander-in-chief came near, the men 
were silent, and every eye was fixed on him, while one of the 
generals explained to him where these guns and men had been 
captured. His face was careworn, and he was hardly listening 
to the account that was being given to him, while he looked 
at the most wretched of the men. Most of the French had 
almost lost the very semblance of humanity; their noses and 
cheeks were frost-bitten, their eyes bloodshot, swollen, and 
rheumy. Two of them, one with his face terribly wounded, 
were devouring some raw meat. There was something fearfully 
and terribly bestial in the scowl which these hapless wretches 
cast at the new-comers. Koutouzow, after watching them for 


324 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


a few minutes, shook his head with a melancholy pity. A 
little further on he came upon a Russian soldier, who was 
speaking to a Frenchman with a kindly smile: again he shook 
his head, and his expression did not change. 

“What were you saying?” he asked a general, who was 
trying to attract his notice to a group of French flags that were 
piled in front of the Préobrajenski Regiment. “Ah! some 
flags!" he added; and rousing himself with an effort from the 
subject of his meditations, he looked vaguely about him, and 
then closed his eyes with a deep sigh. One of his staff signed 
to the soldier who was holding up the flags to bring them 
forward, and place them round about the commander-in-chief. 
For a moment Koutouzow said nothing; then yielding, sorely 
against the grain, to the duties required of him, he raised his 
head, looked steadily at the officers standing near him, and 
said slowly, in the midst of perfect silence, these few words: 

“I thank you all for your faithful and laborious service. 
Victory is on our side, and Russia will never forget us. Glory 
will be yours in ages to come!” He paused; then, seeing a 
private with a French eagle, which he was holding low in salute 
before the Préobrajenski standard, he went on: 

“Lower, lower still! He must bow his head. Yes, that is 
right! Now, then, hurrah! my children!” and he turned to 
the men. 

“Hurrah!” roared thousands of voices. While they were 
still shouting, Koutouzow, bending over his horse’s neck, bowed 
his head, and a gentle ironical smile dawned on his face. 

“That is the way of it, my children,” said he, when all was 
silent once more, and officers and men crowded round to hear 
what he was about to say. The tone of his voice, the expression 
of his face were completely changed; he was no longer the 
commander-in-chief, but simply a veteran soldier addressing 
his comrades in arms. 

“That is the way of it, my children. I know how hard it is, 
but what is to be done? Have patience; it will not last much 
longer. We will see our visitors safe off, and then we will rest. 
The czar will not forget your services. It is very hard I know, 
but at any rate you are at home, remember—while they—" 
and he pointed to the prisoners, “see what they are reduced to. 
Their misery is beyond that of the most abject beggar. When 
they were strong we did not spare them, but now we may have 
some pity. They are men like ourselves, are they not, my 
children?" 


625 


WAR AND PEACE 


He could read the sympathy roused by his speech in the 
steady and respectful gaze of the men. His face brightened 
with a benevolent smile on his lips and in his eyes; he looked 
down, however, and added: “But, after all, who asked them 
to come? They have no more than they deserve, perhaps." 

He touched his horse with his whip, and uttering a tremendous 
oath, rode away, followed by the hurrahs and laughter of the 
men, who at once broke up their ranks. 

Not all his words, no doubt, had reached the understanding 
of the troops, and no one could have repeated them accurately; 
but their solemnity to begin with, and the frank, kindly 
simplicity that had stamped them at the conclusion, went 
Straight to the men's hearts. Each man, indeed, felt, like his 
chief, not only the justice of his cause, and the triumph of right, 
but that honest compassion for the enemy which had found 
expression in the old man's sound oath; the soldiers’ hearty 
shouts were their response, and they did not cease for some 
time. One of the aides-de-camp having asked the marshal 
whether he would not now get into his carriage, Koutouzow 
apparently still labouring under his emotions, suddenly flushed. 


CHAPTER CXVI 


TWILIGHT had set in on the 2oth of November, the last day of 
the fighting at Krasnoé, when the troops reached their halting- 
place for the night. The weather was still calm, there was a 
hard frost, and though a few flakes of snow fell at intervals, a 
starlit, purple sky bent over the scene. 

The infantry regiment, which had started from Taroutino 
3,000 strong, was the first to arrive at the village, now number- 
ing goo. The quartermasters found that every hut was 
occupied by the sick and dead, by staff-officers or cavalry men. 
Only one was vacant for the use of the colonel of the regiment, 
who at once proceeded thither, while the men marched through 
the village, and piled their arms in front of the farthest houses. 

The regiment, like a many-armed polyp, at once set to work 
to establish itself, and find food. A party of soldiers, plunging 
through snow up to their knees, made their way to a birch- 
copse to the right of the road, and in a few minutes it was ring- 
ing with their songs and the blows of the axes as they lopped 
the branches. Another party was busy round the wagons, 


326 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


taking out the cooking-pots, biscuit, and forage for the horses, 
who were already picketed; others again had dispersed through 
the village to clear out the lodgings for the officers of the staff, 
carry off the dead bodies of the French, and secure the thatch 
off the roofs, with boards and dead brushwood from the hedges, 
to throw up some form of shelter. 

A dozen or so of men were in the act of uprooting a hedge 
which enclosed a shed off which the roof had already been torn. 

“Now, then, all at once—push!” cried several; and the 
hedge, laden with snow, rocked under their efforts, cracking in 
the darkness with the crisp ring of frozen wood. The stakes 
yielded, and at last the hedge half gave way, dragging the 
soldiers down in its fall. The men roared with laughter. 

“Hold on there, you two. . . .” 

“Here, where is the crowbar?” 

“What the deuce are you doing?” 

“ Now, boys, once more. In time." 

They were all silent, and a deep, rich bass set up a song; at 
the end of the third beat, as the last note died away, all the 
soldiers joined in with a tuneful shout: “All together, boys! 
over she goes!" But still the fence held good, and they stood 
panting for breath. 

“Here, you fellows of the 6th, come here, lend a hand; we 
will do you a turn some day." 

Some men of the 6th company who were coming through 
the village answered to the call, and a few minutes later the 
tall hedge was borne off in triumph, its tangled and wattled 
branches bruising the breathless men's shoulders under their 
weight. 

“Look out there! You are stumbling, blockhead!” 

* What are you at?" cried a non-commissioned officer in 
imperious tones, rushing at the party. “The general is in that 
isba. I will teach you—idiots that you are!" he went on, 
giving a violent cuff to the first soldier that came under his 
hand. “Silence there! Not so much row!” 

The soldiers were silent, though the one who had been hit 
growled between his teeth as he saw the sergeant retiring. 

“By G——, what a blow! My face is bleeding!” 

“And you don’t like it? Fancy that!” said a mocking 
voice. Then walking more circumspectly they went on their 
way; but as soon as they were beyond the village their spirits 
were as boisterous as ever, and they began their riotous chatter 
once more, interlarded with harmless swearing. 


B27 


WAR AND PEACE 


The officers, assembled in the cottage and drinking their tea, 
were eagerly discussing the day just passed and the plans for 
the morrow; a flank march to the left was projected, to cut off 
the viceroy’s communications and take him prisoner. 

While the men lugged their hedge along, stumbling at every 
step, fires were crackling under the pots, the wood roared and 
blazed, the snow melted, and the black shapes of men stamping 
to warm their feet were to be seen moving in every direction. 
Though no orders had been given, knives and axes were busily 
at work—on one hand wood was being heaped up for the fires 
during the night, and tents were being pitched for the officers ; 
on the other, supper was being cooked, guns cleaned and 
accoutrements brushed up. The hedge, supported by stakes, 
was erected on the northern side in a semi-circle to screen their 
fire. The bugles sounded, the roll was called, supper was eaten, 
and the men crowded round the blaze, some mending their 
shoes or smoking a pipe, while others stripped to the skin and 
toasted their fleas or other vermin. 


CHAPTER CXVII 


THE peculiarly squalid condition and hard lot of these soldiers, 
who lacked shoes and warm clothing, slept under the stars, and 
marched through deep snow with a temperature at 18 degrees 
below freezing, might have given reasonable ground for expect- 
ing to see them in the most wretched plight. On the contrary, 
never, even under the happiest circumstances, had the army been 
in such good spirits or so well affected. The reason was that 
every day it was able to shake off the weak or dejected; thus 
those that were left were the pick of the troops, the strongest in 
body and in mind. 

A number of men of the 8th company had collected under 
shelter of their hedge. Among others two sergeant-majors had 
claimed a seat near this fire which burnt better than any other, 
saying that they had brought logs to it. 

“I say, Makééf—are you lost? Have the wolves got you? 
Bring us some wood, slowcoach!” cried a red-haired soldier 
with a face scorched by the frost and eyes blinking in the 
smoke, but who would not stir from his place by the fire. 

“Do you go, ‘Crow,’” said the man addressed, turning to 
one of his comrades. 


328 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


The red-haired man wes neither sergeant nor corporal, but 
his powerful build gave him the right of might to order his 
companions about. The “Crow,” a lean little fellow with a 
sharp nose, rose submissively but at the same moment the 
blaze lighted up the figure of a fine-looking young trooper who 
came forward bent under the weight of a pile of dry wood. 

“That’s good—hand them here!" The boughs were broken 
and heaped upon the embers; every mouth was ready to blow, 
the fire was fanned with the skirts of the men’s greatcoats, and 
in a moment the flame rose, flinging up the sparks. The party 
crowded round and lighted their pipes, while the young trooper 
with his hands on his hips danced a measure to warm his frozen 
feet. 

“Oh! little mother, the dew is cold but lovely!” he sang in 
an undertone. 

“Look out, your soles are flying off!” cried the red-haired 
man, seeing one of the lad’s soles hanging loose. “It is 
dangerous to dance too much nowadays." 

The dancer stopped, pulled off the torn leather and flung it 
into the fire. 

* That's a true word!" he said; he took a piece of dark-blue 
French cloth out of his cartridge-pouch and wrapped it round 
his foot over his shoe. 

“We shall soon have new ones now,” said one of the men, 
“and two pairs apiece perhaps. So Pétrow, the skulking lout, 
has stayed behind with the stragglers?” 

“But I saw him I am sure,” said another. 

* Well, after all he is only one more. . . .” 

“Nine men were missing when the gth were called over last 
night." 

“That is no news! And what is a man to do when his feet 
are frozen?" 

“What is the use of thinking about it?" muttered the 
sergeant. 

* You would like to try how it feels perhaps?" said an old 
soldier reproachfully to the man who had mentioned frozen feet. 

“What do you take us for?" said a shrill quavering voice 
from the other side of the fire; it was the man they had called 
“Crow.” “Even if we are not ill we grow thinner and thinner, 
and at last must die. Like me; I am done for. Send me to 
hospital" he went on, boldly addressing the sergeant. “I 
have pains in every inch of me and the fever never leaves me; 
I shall be the next to drop on the road!” 


929 


WAR AND PEACE 


“Come, come!” said the sergeant coolly. 

The “Crow” said no more, and the conversation again 
became general. 

“They have caught a good lot of Frenchmen to-day, but 
their shoes were not worth mentioning,” said a soldier to 
change the subject. 

“The Cossacks took care of that, when they cleared out the 
house for the colonel and carried them all away. Would you 
believe it, lads, I could not bear to see them so knocked about! 
One of them was still alive and mumbling something to himself. 
And how clean they are, boys, all those men—and so white! 
As white as that birch-tree yonder. And there are some 
fine brave fellows among them, I can tell you, and noblemen 
too.” 

“What is the wonder of that? They recruit them from all 
classes over there.” 

“And yet they do not understand a word we say to them,” 
objected the young soldier. “I asked one of them what crown 
he was under, and he would only stammer out his own gibberish. 
They are a queer people!” 

“There is some bogey trick at the bottom of it, boys,” said 
the one who had expressed his astonishment at the whiteness of 
French skins. “The people about Mojaisk told me that when 
they carted away the dead, a month after the battle, they were 
still as clean and as white as paper, and didn’t smell a bit.” 

“Because it was so cold, perhaps?” said one. 

“What a blockhead’s speech! How could it be the cold 
when it was hot weather? Besides, if it had been the cold our 
men would have been the same; while they told me our men 
were all worm-eaten and they had to cover up their faces while 
they moved them; but the Frenchmen were as white as a 
sheet of paper.” 

“It is the feeding does it most likely,” said the sergeant; 
“they lived like princes.” 

“And the peasants thereabouts told me,” the former speaker 
went on, “that men were sent out from ten villages, and that 
for twenty days they did nothing but cart away the dead; 
and that was not nearly all, for there were many packs of 
wolves. . . .” 

“Ah! that was something like a battle!” said an old trooper. 
“The others were no good except just to worry the men. The 
day before yesterday we stumbled on some of them. But, 
bless you, they don't let you get anywhere near! Down go 


330 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


their guns, and they flop on their knees crying “Pardon!” 
They say that Platow took Napoleon himself twice, but even 
when you have him in your hands, he turns himself into a bird 
and flies away. And you can’t kill him.” 

“Oh, Kisseleff, you're a great one for lies, now I look at you!” 

“Tt isn’t lies. It's absolute God's truth." 

"If it were my luck to get him, I'd bury him straight away 
and put an aspen stake through him. Think of the people 
he's destroyed." 

“Ah, well, we'll make an end of him sooner or later. That'll 
stop his prowling,” said an old soldier, yawning. 

The conversation now died away, each man making his own 
arrangements for the night as best he might. 

“Lord! what heaps of stars! It looks as if the women had 
spread their linen out over the sky!” cried the young fellow, 
gazing up in admiration at the Milky Way. 

“Tt is a good sign, children; it means a fine harvest.” 

Snoring was soon audible in the general silence; some turned 
over to warm themselves, muttering a few words to each other. 
Suddenly a peal of laughter, from another camp fire about a 
hundred yards away, fell on their ear. 

“What is going on over there, among the men of the 5th? 
They have got company there! Look!” 

A soldier rose and went to see. 

“They are uncommonly jolly over there,” said he, coming 
back. “Two Frenchmen have come in; one is half-frozen, 
but the other is as merry as a grig and singing to them.” 

“Oh, ho! Well, come along then, we must see the fun.” 


CHAPTER CXVIII 


Tue sth company had bivouacked on the skirts of the wood, 
and an enormous fire built up in the middle of the snow threw 
its broad light on the boughs that bent under the icicles, when 
late in the evening, steps were heard cracking the dry sticks 
under the trees. 

“Hark, boys! A bear!” said a soldier. All the men raised 
their heads and listened. Two human creatures, strange 
indeed to look upon, came out of the underwood into the full 
glare of the blaze: two Frenchmen, who had been hiding in 


331 


WAR AND PEACE 


the wood. They came towards the Russians, uttering unin- 
telligible words. One, who wore an officer’s shako, seemed 
desperately weak; he dropped rather than lay down by the 
fire; his companion, a short, square-set man, with his head 
tied up, was evidently of robuster frame. He raised his com- 
rade’s head, and pointing to his mouth said something. The 
soldiers gathered round him, spread a coat under the invalid, 
and brought both the wanderers some porridge and some brandy. 
The officer was Captain Ramballe, with his servant Morel. 
When Morel had swailowed some brandy and a large bowl of 
porridge, a morbid jollity came over him; he talked without 
stopping, while his master, who refused all food, lay in gloomy 
silence, staring vaguely at the Russians with bloodshot eyes. 
Every now and then a long, quivering groan broke from his | 
lips. Morel, pointing to his epaulettes, tried to explain that 
his master was an officer, and that what he wanted was warmth. 
A Russian officer, coming up, dispatched a man to ask the 
colonel whether he would give shelter to a French officer who 
was perishing of cold, and the colonel sent word that he was to 
be taken to him at once. Ramballe was told to rise, and he 
tried; but he tottered at the first attempt, and would have 
fallen back but for a private who lifted him up, and with the 
help of some others carried him to the hut. Putting his arms 
round the neck of his nurses, and leaning his head on one of 
the men’s shoulders like a weary child, he kept repeating in a 
AE voice: “Oh! my good, kind friends! What good 
ellows!” 

Morel, left with the men, now took the best place; his eyes 
were red, inflamed and watery; he had on a woman’s pelisse, 
and had tied a handkerchief over his cap and knotted it under 
his chin. The brandy had gone a little to his head, and he 
sat singing a French song in a husky, tremulous voice. The 
soldiers were holding their sides to laugh. 

“Come—let me try to learn it; I shall soon catch the tune. 
Begin again,” said a soldier, whom Morel was clasping in a 
fond embrace. 

“Vive Henri quatre, vive ce roi vaillant |? sang Morel. 

“Vive Harica, Vive cerowvalla! Sidiablaka . . ." repeated 
the Russian, who had caught the air. 

“Bravo! bravo!" shouted the others, with a hearty roar of 
laughter, and Morel laughed too as he went on: "Qui eut le 
triple talent de boire, de battre, et d'étre un vert galant |” 

“Tt sounds pretty enough. N ow, then, Zaletaiew, go on.” 


332 


He swallowed some brandy and a large bowl of porridge 


S: ad Ore oe ow TEES 
b. TEA gate ann nhac ee i 
PC ee 2 ERES AL 21 nr eT P fna. d 
7 ‘$s 1 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


“Iou, iou—le triptala deboi, deba et dettra vergala |!" he sang 
at the top of his voice, but puckering his lips elaborately. 

"That's it, that’s it! That's French, sure enough! Give 
him some more porridge; it will take a good deal to satisfy his 
hunger," and Morel had soon disposed of his third bowlful. 

The young soldiers smiled in sympathy, while the older men, 
regarding such puerilities as beneath them, remained stretched 
by the fire, raising themselves now and then to glance good- 
naturedly at Morel. 

"'They are men too, after all," said one of them, drawing 
his coat round him. “And even wormwood has roots.” 

“Oh! what crowds of stars!" said another. “It is a sign 
of frost, worse luck!" 

The stars, secure from any interference in their affajrs, seemed 
to sparkle with added brilliancy in the dark vault; now dis- 
appearing and now lighting up again, and sending a shaft 
of light through space they seemed to be telegraphing some 
glad mystery to each other. 


CHAPTER CXIX 


AND so the French army continued to melt away with regularly 
increasing rapidity, and the crossing of the Bérésina, about 
which so much has been written, was but an incident in 
its destruction, and not, in truth, the decisive episode of the 
campaign. The reason that so much has been said about it by 
the French is that all the misfortunes and disasters which they 
had met with, one by one, in the course of their retreat, com- 
bined their forces in one tremendous catastrophe to overwhelm 
them on that narrow bridge, and left ineffaceable traces on 
their memory. And if its fame was no less among the Russians, 
it was because Pfühl, at St. Petersburg—far enough from the 
seat of war, had devised a project by which Napoloen was to 
be entrapped in a complex strategical snare which he had laid 
for him, ex professo, on the shores of the Bérésina. Thus, 
being convinced that everything must happen in exact accord- 
ance with this scheme, it was always asserted that the passage 
of the Bérésina had proved fatal to the French, when, in fact, 
its results were less disastrous than the action of Krasnoé, as 
can be proved by the sum total of prisoners and guns that they 
left behind after that engagement. 


> 


WAR AND PEACE 


The more precipitate the flight of the French van, the more 
wretched was the condition of the wrecked remains of their 
army, especially after the Bérésina; while, on the other hand, 
the more furious was the wrath of the Russian generals, who 
spared no one, and least of all Koutouzow. Believing that the 
failure of the St. Petersburg plan would be certainly attributed 
to him, they made no secret of their disgust, venting it in 
contempt and sarcasms—veiled, of course, under respectful 
formalities—which placed him in a position in which he could 
not answer the accusation. All his suite, blind to his true 
character, declared that any discussion was out of the question 
with this wrong-headed old man; that he could never attain 
to their breadth of view; that he would always repeat his 
wearisome saying: “We must make a bridge of gold for the 
French." When he answered, instead, that they must wait for^ 
provisions, or that the men were barefoot, these obvious replies 
to their learned theories were to them only fresh proof that 
he was an old idiot, while they, who were really skilful and 
intelligent, had no power to act. 

This disaffection and ill-will reached their height after the 
junction of Koutouzow’s army with that of Wittgenstein, the 
famous admiral and favourite hero of St. Petersburg. Once only, 
after the Bérésina, did Koutouzow lose his temper, and wrote 
as follows to Bennigsen, who was the czar’s private reporter: 


“I must request your excellency, on receiving this letter, to 
retire to Kalouga on account of the precarious state of your 
health, and to await there his majesty’s further commands.” 


In consequence of this banishment of Bennigsen, the Grand 
Duke Constantine, who had been with the troops during the 
early part of the campaign, and had been set aside by 
Koutouzow, rejoined the army, and communicated to the 
commander-in-chief his majesty’s annoyance at the smallness 
of the Russian successes and the slowness of their movements 4 
he also announced that his majesty himself would arrive shortly. 
Koutouzow, whose experience as a courtier was at least equal 
to his acumen as a soldier, understood at once that his part 
was played out, and that the semblance of power he had been 
allowed to wield was now withdrawn. It was easy to under- 
stand. On one hand the campaign which it had been his 
duty to conduct was at an end, and his function therefore 
fulfilled; on the other, he was, in fact, physically weary, and 
his frame, broken by years, needed complete repose. 


334 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


CHAPTER CXX 


HE returned to Vilna on the 29th of November—“his dear 
Vilna," as he called it. He had already been twice governor 
of the town, so that he found there not only the ease that could 
only be had in a city which had happily escaped the horrors of 
war, but also old friends and pleasant memories. Casting off 
all the cares of government and of military command, he settled 
down into a calm and regular life, so far at least as he could in 
the midst of the intrigues that buzzed around him—as though 
henceforth he was perfectly indifferent to any events that 
might occur, however important. 

The most indefatigable schemer of military manceuvres was 
Tchitchagow; it was he who had proposed to carry war into 
Greece or to Warsaw, and he always objected to going where 
he was sent. Tchitchagow considered Koutouzow as under 
obligations to him, because when, in 1811, he was charged with 
the duty of concluding peace with Turkey, irrespective of 
Koutouzow, and found that it was already signed, he explained 
to the czar that the credit of the negotiations was entirely due 
to Koutouzow, and was himself the first to receive him at the 
gate of the castle of Vilna, in naval undress, his hat under his 
arm, and to present him with the report of the state of the 
troops and with the keys of the town. But now the half- 
contemptuous deference of the younger generation of men for 
the old man whom they chose to consider as in his dotage was 
suddenly and brutally manifest in the behaviour of Tchitcha- 
gow, who was well aware of the accusations that had been 
brought against Koutouzow. When Koutouzow told him that 
the fourgons containing his table-plate, which had been seized 
at Borissow, would be restored to him intact, Tchitchagow 
replied: 

“T suppose you wish to convey that I have nothing to eat 
with! But I have, I assure you, all you are likely to require, 
even if you should wish to give dinner-parties.” His instinct 
was always to make a display of his personal importance, and 
he ascribed the same feeling to Koutouzow. 

* Indeed," replied the elder simply, with a keen and subtle 
smile. “I only told you because I thought you might like to 
know, not for any other reason." 

The commander-in-chief had detained almost all the troops 
at Vilna, against the czar's desire. After a short residence 


585 


WAR AND PEACE 


there the men about him declared that he had altogether lost 
his head. Henceforth he troubled himself very little about 
military matters, and left the generals to act as they chose, 
leading a life of pleasure till the sovereign should arrive. 

On the 11th of December, his majesty and his suite, attended 
by Count Tolstoi, Prince Volkonsky, and Araktchéiew, arrived 
in his travelling-sleigh at the castle of Vilna. In spite of the 
bitter cold, a hundred or so of generals and staff-officers, with a 
guard of honour of the Séménovsky Regiment, were awaiting 
him outside the gates. The czar’s courier arriving in a troika 
driven at breakneck speed, shouted: “He is coming!” and 
Konovnitzine rushed into the vestibule to announce the czar 
to Koutouzow, who was waiting in the ante-room. A moment 
after that he stepped out on the terrace, his breast covered with 
orders, his sash tightening his burly waist, and his stout, heavy: 
person swaying as he moved; he put on his hat, took his gloves 
in his hand, and slowly descending the steps, took from an 
official the report it was his duty to present to his majesty. 

A second troika came flying by, and then all eyes were fixed 
upon a sleigh that followed swiftly and in which the czar and 
Volkonsky could be seen sitting side by side. 

Though accustomed for fifty years to the nervous excitement 
that he always felt on receiving an imperial visit, the com- 
mander-in-chief was as much agitated as usual: he hastily felt 
all his medals and stars, and set his hat straight on his head. 
As the czar stepped out of the carriage he looked up at him; 
then, taking courage, he presented the report and addressed his 
majesty in his soft, engaging tones. Alexander glanced at him 
from head to foot with a slight frown, but at once recollected 
himself, and opened his arms to embrace him. And, as usual, 
this friendly accolade, rousing personal secret associations, 
thrilled him with deep feeling which expressed itself in a sob. 

The czar bowed to the officers and to the Séménovsky Guards, 
and once more pressing Koutouzow’s hand, led the way to the 
castle. When they were alone he did not attempt to dissemble 
his vexation at the mistakes that had been committed at 
Krasnoé and the Bérésina, and at Koutouzow’s slowness in 
pursuit of the enemy; he also laid before him a plan for a 
campaign beyond the frontier. Koutouzow made no remarks 
nor objections. His face expressed only passive and utter sub- 
mission—as it had seven years before, when receiving the czar’s 
commands on the field of Austerlitz. When he quitted him, 
his head bent on his breast, as he crossed the large reception- 


336 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


room with his heavy, uncertain step, he heard a voice saying: 
“Your highness!” 

Koutouzow looked up and gazed for some little space at 
Count Tolstoi, who was standing before him and offering a 
small object on a tray. He did not seem to understand what 
he was to do. Suddenly the faintest possible smile dawned on 
his large face, and bowing respectfully, he took up the object 
thus presented to him. It was the Order of St. George of the 
first class. 


CHAPTER CXXI 


NExT evening Koutouzow gave a grand banquet, and after it 
a ball, which the czar honoured with his presence. From the 
moment when it was known that Koutouzow had received the 
Star of St. George everyone was eager to do him honour; still, 
his majesty’s disappointment was no secret from anyone. All 
the proprieties were observed, and the czar was the first to set 
the example, but it was whispered that the old man was much 
to blame and quite childish. When his majesty entered the 
bail-room, Koutouzow, with a reminiscence of the traditions of 
the days of Catherine, had the enemy’s standards bowed before 
him in salute, and Alexander with a scowl only muttered a few 
words—among others: “Old actor!” 

His annoyance with Koutouzow arose from the marshal’s not 
sezing—or not choosing to see—that the intended campaign 
was necessary. The day after his arrival at Vilna, Alexander 
had said to the assembled officers: “You have not merely 
saved Russia, you have saved Europe!” 

They all understood from this that the war was not over. 
But Koutouzow would not hear of it: he said very plainly that 
a continuance of the war could neither improve the position 
nor add to the glory of Russia; that, on the contrary, it would 
weaken its prestige. He tried to prove to the czar the impos- 
sibility of levying fresh troops, and even ventured to suggest 
the possibility of failure. 

From this moment it was evident that the marshal was 
simply an obstacle to be got rid of. To avoid hurting his 
feelings too much, a quite natural arrangement was hit upon; 
the power was gradually taken out of his hands and transferred 
to the czar, as had been done at Austerlitz. To this end the 


35 


WAR AND PEACE 


staff was somewhat altered, and that of Koutouzow was deprived 
of all influence. Toll, Konovnitzine, and Yermolow had fresh 
appointments, and the marshal’s shaken health was openly 
discussed ; for the more was said about it the easier it would be 
to nominate his successor. Just as before, when Koutouzow 
had been quietly brought back from Turkey to organise the 
St. Petersburg militia, and from thence sent to the army where 
he was indispensable, so now, his work being done, fresh wheels 
were set in motion. 

The war of 1812 was no longer to maintain the strictly 
national character which endeared it to every Russian heart, 
and was to become of European importance. 

And now the movement of the western nations eastwards 
gave place to a tide the other way. This new war needed a 
new mainspring, acting under different impulses from Kou-. 
touzow’s. The man to fill this place was the Czar Alexander, 
who was as necessary to the restoration of nations and national 
frontiers as Koutouzow had been to the safety and glory of 
Russia. Koutouzow had no comprehension of what was meant 
by Europe, by the balance of power, and by Napoleon's aggres- 
sions. To him, as the representative of the Russian people, a 
Russian himself to the backbone, the work seemed to be finished 
as soon as the foe was crushed, and his country delivered and 
placed on a pinnacle of glory. There was nothing left to the 
champion of his country but to die—and he died. 


CHAPTER CXXII 


PrrER—like most men under similar citcumstances—did not 
feel the full effects of the physical privations and moral tension 
he had endured during his captivity till it was over. As soon 
as he was free he started for Orel, and two days after, when he 
was on the point of starting for Kiew, he was attacked by what 
the doctors called a bilious fever, which detained him at Orel 
three months. In spite of their attentions—bleedings and every 
kind of physic—he recovered his health. 

The days that elapsed between his rescue and the time that 
he fell ill left no trace on his memory but of grey, dull, rainy 
weather, of physical prostration, of horrible pain in his feet and 
in his side, of an endless series of troubles and miseries, of 
impertinent curiosity in the officers who would cross-question 


338 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


him, of his difficulty in finding carriages or horses, and above all 
of moral and mental torpor. On the day that had brought 
him freedom he saw Pétia carried by—dead; and he heard 
that Prince Andrew had just died at Yaroslaw under the same 
roof with the Rostows. Denissow, who told him this, also 
alluded to Helens death, of which he supposed him to be in- 
formed; Peter was greatly surprised, but that was all; he was 
incapable of taking in all the bearings of this event on his own 
future. His only idea was to get away from this hell-on-earth, 
where men did nothing but kill each other, to find a refuge some- 
where—anywhere; to rest; to co-ordinate his ideas; to reflect 
in peace on all he had seen and gone through. 

When he first completely recovered his wits after his illness, 
he saw, at the foot of his bed, two of his old servar.ts who had 
come from Moscow expressly to wait on him, and with them his 
eldest cousin, who had been living on one of his estates in the 
neighbourhood of Orel. 

The impressions to which he had become inured faded very 
gradually from his mind during the long process of convales- 
cence; he even had some difficulty in accustoming himself to 
the idea, as each morning dawned, that he should not be driven 
forward with a flock in which he was a unit, that no one would 
take possession of his bed, and that he was certain to have 
dinner and supper each in due season. And when he fell 
asleep he constantly dreamed of the scenes and details of his 
life as a prisoner. 

But the happy sense of liberty which is innate in man, and 
which he had felt keenly enough in the first hours after his 
rescue, came back to him and possessed him wholly during his 
convalescence. He could not understand how this merely 
mental liberty quite apart from external circumstances could be 
so intense a joy, and give him such exquisite pleasure; it was 
in fact only the result of his physical freedom. He was alone 
in a strange town, no one made any demands on him, he wanted 
for nothing, and the remembrance of his wife no longer haunted 
him as a perpetual humiliation. 

From old habit he sometimes said to himself: “What is 
there for me to do next?”—and the answer was: “Nothing. 
To live. Great God! how good that is!" He had no aim in 
life, and this indifference, which had formerly been his bane, 
now gave him a sense of unlimited freedom. Why should he 
have any such aim now that he had faith—not faith in any set 
of rules or accepted dogmas, but in a living and ever-present 


959 


WAR AND PEACE 


God? Formerly he had sought Him in the duties he had set 
himself; then, suddenly, as a captive, he had discovered, not 
by force of logic but by a sort of personal revelation, that there 
was indeed a God, an omnipotent God; and that the God 
known to Plato Karataiew was greater and more supremely 
above human apprehension than the “ Architect of the Universe,” 
as acknowledged by the freemasons. Had he not been like 
a man who looks far away for an object that lies at his 
feet? Had he not spent his life in staring into vacancy over 
other men's heads, while he had only to look close before 
him? In that past time nothing had revealed the Infinite to 
him; he had only felt that it must exist somewhere, and walked 
on, resolute to seek it; everything within his reach had been 
a mere medley of narrow and petty interests devoid of real 
meaning—such as the social life of Europe, politics, freemasonry, 
and philosophy. But now he understood the Infinite, he saw 
it in everything, and wholly admired the ever-changing and 
ever-glorious picture of life in its endless variety. The awful 
question which had been wont to confront him at every turn, 
which had undermined again and again the structures of his 
mind: “Why?”—no longer haunted him; his soul could 
reply in all honesty and simplicity that God is, and that not a 
hair of a man's head can fall without His will. 


CHAPTER CXXIII 


PETER had changed but little; absent-minded as ever, he only 
seemed to be under the influence of some constant fixed idea. 
What had formerly repelled acquaintance in spite of his kind 
face was his unhappy expression; but now the constant smile 
which the mere joy of living brought to his lips, and the sym- 
pathetic kindness of his eyes, made him everywhere a welcome 
presence. He had been wont to be argumentative, to fire up 
readily, and be an unwilling listener; now he was rarely to be 
tempted into a discussion, he was ready to let others talk, and 
thus often learnt their most secret thoughts. 

His cousin, who had never loved him, indeed, who had sincerely 
hated him when, after the old count’s death, he had laid her 
under obligations to him, could not get over her astonishment 
on discovering, after a short sojourn at Orel—whither she came 
to nurse him in spite of the ingratitude of which she chose to 


340 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


accuse him—that she felt a genuine liking for him. But he 
had done nothing to win her good graces; he had simply studied 
her character with some curiosity. Formerly, as she had 
always suspected him of indifference or of ironical meaning, she 
had shrunk into herself and put forth all her prickles; now, on 
the other hand, perceiving as she did, with distrust at first and 
then with gratitude, that he was endeavouring to read and 
understand her deepest feelings, she unconsciously learnt to 
show only the best side of her nature: “In fact, he is a very 
excellent creature when he is not under the influence of evil- 
disposed persons, but under that of people like myself,” said 
the lady to herself. The change that had taken place in Peter 
was also noticed by his two servants Terenty and Vasska. 
They found him considerably aged. Often Terenty in undressing 
his master and taking away his clothes to clean, would pause 
to see if Peter showed any signs of wishing to converse with 
him. And generally Peter would detain him with a question, 
and listen to his stories or tell his own, making the servant 
conscious of the new friendly relations that existed between 
him and his master. 

The doctor, who called on him daily, though he felt it incum- 
bent on him to explain that every minute of his time was precious 
to suffering humanity, would spend hours with Peter, relating 
his favourite anecdotes and his observations on the characters 
of his patients—especially women. “It’s a pleasure to talk to 
a man like that. Not like one of our provincial gentry,” he 
would say. 

Several French officers were residing as prisoners at Orel, 
and the doctor brought one to call on Peter. He was an 
Italian, and soon fell into a habit of going often to see Peter; 
and Princess Catherine laughed to herself at the fervent friend- 
ship he showed to her cousin. He enjoyed talking to him, 
relating his past life and confiding to him all his love affairs, 
pouring forth, too, the venom of his hatred of the French, and 
especially of Napoleon. 

“Tf all Russians are like you," he said one day to Peter, 
“it is really a sacrilege to make war on such a nation. You, 
who have suffered so much at their hands, do not even hate 
them.” 

At Orel, Peter also found an old acquaintance, Count Villarsky, 
the freemason whom we met before in 1807. He had married 
a very rich Russian lady, whose estates were in the government 
of Orel, and he was just now temporarily employed in the 


341 


WAR AND PEACE 


commissariat department. Though he had never been particu- 
larly intimate with Bésoukhow, he was pleased to meet him 
again; he was bored to death at Orel, and only too glad to 
fall in with a man of his own society, taking it for granted 
that they must have some tastes in common. However, to his 
great surprise, he found that Peter was remarkably behind the 
world in his ideas, that he had sunk into what Villarsky took 
for apathy and egoism. 

“You are fossilising, my dear fellow!” he constantly said to 
him; and yet he would return day after day; and Peter, as he 
talked with him, wondered how he could ever have thought as 
this man did. 

Villarsky, forced to attend to his duties, his business, and his 
family, regarded all such personal cares as a hindrance to the 
real uses of life. Military affairs, administrative politics, and 
freemasonry were the objects of his interest. Peter did not 
blame him for this, and never tried in any way to lead him to 
change his views; but he studied the singular phenomenon 
with a mildly satirical smile. 

A quite new feature in Peter’s character, and a generally 
attractive one, was his recognition of every man’s right—as he 
believed—to think and judge for himself, and of the impossi- 
bility of convincing anyone, be it who it might, by mere words. 
This right, which formerly had irritated him excessively, was 
now the chief source of his interest in his fellow-men. 

This new view of things had its influence, too, on the practical 
outcome of his life. Formerly all demands for gifts of money 
had worried and puzzled him. “The man wants it, no doubt,” 
he would say to himself, “but such another wants it even more. 
And how can I tell that they are not both deceiving me?” 
Finally, not knowing how to decide, he gave away money right 
and left, all he had at his disposal. But now, to his great sur- 
prise, he no longer felt this perplexity; an instinctive sense of 
justice, which he himself could not account for, guided him 
unfailingly as to the right decision in each case. Thus, one day 
a French prisoner, a colonel, after boasting for some time of 
his various exploits, ended by requesting, almost demanding, a 
loan of 4,000 francs, to forward, as he said, to his wife and 
children. Peter refused without an instant’s hesitation, sur- 
prising himself by the readiness with which he answered in the 
negative; and instead of handing the sum to the colonel, he 
persuaded the Italian, who needed it sorely, to accept it. 

He acted in the same spirit with regard to his wife’s debts, 


342 


Several French officers were residing as prisoners at Orel 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


and the reconstruction of his houses in the town and in the 
country. His head steward, in laying before him a schedule of 
his losses by the burning of Moscow—which were estimated at 
about two millions of roubles, advised him to recoup himself by 
ignoring the countess’s debts, and by not restoring his houses, 
which cost about 80,000 roubles a year to keep up. At the 
first moment Peter agreed; but when, towards the end of 
January, the architect at Moscow sent him an estimate for 
the works needed to restore the ruined buildings, Peter once 
more read through the letters he had received from Prince Basil 
and some of his friends in reference to his wife’s liabilities, and 
did not hesitate to reverse his decision. He made up his mind 
to rebuild his houses, and to go to St. Petersburg to pay off the 
countess’s debts. This, it was true, would diminish his income 
by about three-quarters, but as soon as he saw that it was just 
and necessary, he immediately proceeded to carry it out. 

Villarsky having occasion to make a journey to Moscow, he 
arranged to travel with him, and all the way he went his feeling 
was that of a schoolboy out for a holiday. Everything he saw 
on the road appeared in a new light, and his companion’s 
frequently expressed regrets at the poor and backward condi- 
tion of Russia as compared with western Europe could not 
diminish his enthusiasm: for where Villarsky saw only deplor- 
able torpidity, Peter, on the contrary, discovered the source of 
that endurance, strength and vital energy which had supported 
the nation—a nation fundamentally pure, and unique in its 
way—in a struggle fought out on snow-covered plains. 


CHAPTER CXXIV 


Ir would be as difficult to account for the motives which led 
the Russians, after the departure of the French, to congregate 
once more on the spot called Moscow, as to discern why and 
where the ants rush in such bewildered haste, when an ant-hill 
is upturned by accident. Some flee, carrying their eggs or 
minute fragments; others run back to the wreck; they meet, 
jostle and fight; but if we contemplate the ant-hill closely, we 
cannot but perceive, from the energy and persistent activity of 
the myriad inhabitants, that the essential element that gives it 
strength, has survived its utter ruin; and in the same way, by 
the end of October, notwithstanding the absence of all authority, 


343 


WAR AND PEACE 


of church services, of wealth, and even of houses, Moscow had 
the same general aspect as it had had in August. Everything 
had been destroyed excepting its indestructible and vigorous 
vitality. 

The motives which brought back those who first returned 
were wholly savage; a week later and Moscow had already 
15,000 inhabitants, then 25,000; and the number increased so 
rapidly, that by the autumn of 1813 the sum of the inhabitants 
was greater than in the preceding year. 

The Cossacks of Wintzingerode’s detachment, the peasants 
from the neighbouring villages, and the fugitives hiding in the 
suburbs were the first to come back, and devoted themselves to 
pillage—thus carrying on the work begun by the French. The 
peasants made their way home with carts loaded with objects 
they had found in the houses and in the streets ; the Cossacks 
did the same, and the owners snatched all they could from 
each other, under pretence of recovering possession of their 
own, These plunderers were followed by a crowd of others; 
as their numbers swelled, the business became more difficult, 
and robbery took a more organised aspect. 

Though the French had found Moscow deserted, a semblance 
of administration had been kept up; but towards the end of 
their sojourn this mockery of vital energy died out, giving way 
to a state of unchecked pillage. The plundering which marked 
the return of the Russians to their capital brought about the 
reverse process, for people of all classes, tradesmen, artisans 
and peasants—some out of curiosity and some out of self- 
interest or in the interest of their masters—flowed back as the 
blood flows back to the heart, and brought with them wealth 
and regular habits of life. The peasants who came in with 
empty waggons hoping to fill them with booty, were caught by 
the authorities and forced to cart away the dead; others, 
warned in time of their companions’ miscalculation, brought in 
corn, hay, and oats, and by natural competition brought prices 
down to the same level as they had stood at before the catastrophe; 
carpenters came in crowds, expecting to find Work; the burnt- 
out houses were repaired and rose from their ruins; tradesmen 
began business; inns and taverns took possession of abandoned 
premises; the priests reopened the churches that had been 
spared by the fire; officials set their tables and presses in order 
in such little rooms as they could find; the superior authorities 
and the police devoted themselves in distributing the baggage 
left behind by the French— which gave an opportunity, as 


344 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


usual, for abusing and for buying over the police; petitions for 
pecuniary assistance poured in from every quarter, and at the 
same time came the monstrous estimates of the tenders for 
restoring the buildings belonging to the crown; and once again 
Count Rostopchine’s “posters” were to be seen. 


CHAPTER CXXV 


PETER came to Moscow at the end of January, and settled 
himself in one wing of his house, which had escaped injury. 
He intended to start within two days for St. Petersburg, and 
he went to call on Count Rostopchine and some other old 
acquaintances who, in the elation of a final and complete 
victory, received him with joy and questioned him as to all he 
had seen. Though he met with great sympathy, he was re- 
served in his communications, and answered very vaguely when 
he was questioned as to his future plans. He learnt, among 
other things, that the Rostows were at Kostroma; but his 
memory of Natacha was now no more than a sweet reminiscence 
of a very remote past. He was so happy to be independent of 
all the ties of life that it was an additional pleasure to feel free 
from an influence to which, at the time, however, he had yielded 
with his own full consent. 

The Droubetzkois told him that Princess Maria was in Moscow, 
and he went to call on her that same evening. As he went his 
mind dwelt on Prince Andrew, on his sufferings, on his death, 
on their friendship, and above all on their last meeting, the 
evening before Borodino. 

“Did he die in the irritation he was then feeling?” said he 
to himself. “Or was the enigma of life revealed to him in the 
hour of death, I wonder?” Then he thought of Karataiew, 
involuntarily comparing these two men—so unlike each other, 
and yet, to him brought so near by his love for them both. 

He was grave and sad as he went into the Bolkonsky’s house; 
though it had recovered its characteristic aspect it still bore 
traces of the disaster. An old manservant with a stern face, 
as much as to say that the prince’s death had made no change in 
the rules of the establishment, told him that the princess was 
in her own rooms, and received company only on Sundays. 

* Give her my name; perhaps she will see me." 


345 


WAR AND PEACE 


"In that case take the trouble to walk into the portrait- 
gallery.” 

In a few minutes the man returned with Dessalles, to say that 
the princess would be very happy to see Peter, and to beg him 
to go upstairs to her. He found her in an upper room—a 
small, low room, lighted by a single candle. She was in black, 
and another person, also in mourning, was with her. Peter 
supposed at first that this was one of the lady companions 
whom Princess Maria was always glad to have about her, but of 
whom he had never taken any heed. The princess rose eagerly 
and held out her hand. 

“Yes,” said she, as he kissed it, noting the alteration in his 
appearance, “this is how we meet again. He often spoke of 
you towards the end—” and she glanced at the lady in black 
with a hesitancy that did not escape Peter. 

“The news of your rescue was a great happiness to me," she 
went on, “the only joy we have known for very long.” Again 
she glanced uneasily at her companion. 

“Only fancy, I knew nothing about him,” said Peter. “I 
thought he was killed, and I only heard indirectly through a 
third person—I know he found the Rostows. What a strange 
coincidence!" Peter spoke eagerly. He, too, glanced at the 
stranger, and catching her expression of kindly interest, con- 
cluded instinctively that this lady in mourning was charming 
and amiable, and would not be any check on his frank effusive- 
ness to Princess Maria. She, on her part, was very visibly 
confused when he alluded to the Rostows, and she looked once 
more from Peter to the lady in black. 

“Do not you recognise her?” she said. 

Peter now looked with some attention at the pale, delicate 
face, the lips so strangely pinched, and the large black eyes of 
this stranger. Suddenly he found in them that soft radiance 
so dear to his heart, from which he had so long been shut out. 

"Impossible!" he thought. “Can that be she? pale, thin, 
so much older, with that austere expression. It must be a 
delusion!” But the princess spoke Natacha’s name, and the 
pallid face, with its solemn, mournful eyes, with effort and 
difficulty, as a rusty door yields to pressure from without, broke 
into a smile. The lips smiled, and that smile shed a perfume of 
happiness on Peter, which seemed to float round him and 
penetrate his being. There could be no doubt after that smile: 
it was Natacha, and he loved her. The violence of the impres- 
sion was so great that it betrayed at once to Natacha, to Maria, 


346 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


and to himself the certainty of a passion which he still found it 
difficult to confess to himself. His agitation was a mixture of 
joy and pain; the more he tried to mask it the more it betrayed 
itself, without the help of words, by a deepening blush: “It is 
only surprise," said he to himself; but when he tried to resume 
the conversation, and again looked at Natacha, his heart was 
full of happiness and shyness. He got confused in his sentence, 
and broke off short. It was not alone because she was pale and 
thin that he had failed to recognise her, but because her eyes, 
that had formerly been bright with the light of life, now 
expressed nothing but sympathy, kindness, and restless melan- 
choly. Peter's embarrassment roused no response in Natacha; 
her face shone only with gentle satisfaction. 


CHAPTER CXXVI 


“Sue has come to stay with me for some little time," said 
Princess Maria. “The count and countess are to join us before 
long. The poor countess is sad to see. Natacha needs medical 
advice, so I brought her away by force." 

* Ah! which of us has not been tried?” said Peter. “You 
know, of course, that it happened on the day when we were 
rescued—I saw him. What a delightful boy he was!” 

Natacha did not speak, but her eyes dilated and glittered 
with tears that did not fall. 

“There can be no consolation,’ Peter went on. “None! 
Why—one cannot help asking—why should he die? that 
bright young creature, full of life and youth?” 

* Yes, indeed; and that is what makes faith more necessary 
than ever in our time," said Princess Maria. 

* Very true," assented Peter. 

* Why?" asked Natacha, looking at him. 

“Why?” repeated Maria. “The mere thought of that 
which awaits... ." 

* Because," said Peter, interrupting her, "only those who 
believe in the guiding power of God can endure such losses as 
hers . . . and yours." 

Natacha seemed to be about to speak, but checked herself, 
and Peter turned to Princess Maria with an eager wish to know 
some details of his friend's last days. His embarrassment had 
vanished, but with it his feeling of absolute freedom had 


347 


WAR AND PEACE 


vanished too; he was conscious that each word he spoke, and 
everything he did, lay open to a judge whose opinion was the 
most precious in the world to him. Even as he talked he 
quaked in his inmost soul as to the effect he was producing on 
Natacha, and was trying to judge himself from her point of 
view. Princess Maria made up her mind, though reluctantly, 
to give Peter the details he wished for; his questions and the 
interest he took in them, his voice trembling with emotion, 
persuaded her to retrace by degrees the scenes which she hardly 
dared call up for herself. 

“And so he grew calmer and sweeter. He had but one aim 
in life, towards which he strove with all the powers of his soul, 
and that was to be perfectly good. What, then, had he to fear 
in death? His faults, if he had any, cannot be counted 
against him. How happy it was for him that you should 
have met once more!" he added, turning to Natacha, and his 
eyes filled with tears. She shivered a little and bowed her 
head, unable to make up her mind whether she should speak of 
him or no. 

“Yes,” she said in a low, subdued tone. “It was a great 
happiness, to me at any rate; and he”—she tried to control 
her emotion—“he wished it, too, when I went to him." 

Her voice failed her, and she reddened, clasping her hands 
convulsively; then, suddenly raising her head with a visible 
effort, she went on: 

“When we left Moscow I did not know, and I dared not ask 
after him when Sonia told me he was of our party. I could not 
think. I could not imagine what state he might be in; I only 
wanted one thing, and that was to see him." 

Then she told them—what she had never before revealed 
to anyone—all she had suffered during those three weeks of 
travelling and sojourn at Yaroslaw. Peter, as he listened, was 
thinking neither of Prince Andrew nor of death, nor of what 
she was saying. He was conscious only of intense pity for the 
pain it must be to her to call up the grief of the past; but 
Natacha was impelled by an irresistible impulse. She mingled 
the most trivial details with the most sacred feelings, told the 
same scenes again and again, and did not seem to know how to 
stop. Just then, however, Dessalles asked from the next room 
whether the little boy might come in. 

“And that is all—that is all. . . .1" cried Natacha, rising 
hurriedly; and flying out of the door, of which little Nicholas 
had just raised the heavy curtain, she hit her head against the 


348 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


side, and gave a little cry of pain as she disappeared. Was it 
physical pain or mental suffering? 

Peter, who had never taken his eyes off her, felt when she 
was gone that he was alone again in the world. Princess Maria 
roused him from a reverie by attracting his notice to the child, 
His resemblance to his father agitated Peter so deeply in his 
pathetic excitement, that, after giving him a kiss, he had to turn 
away and wipe his eyes. He was about to take leave, but 
Maria detained him. 

“Pray stay,” she said. “Natacha and I often sit up till 
three in the morning. Supper must be ready; will you go 
down? we will be with you in a few minutes. This is the first 
time,” she added, “that she has spoken of him.” 


CHAPTER CXXVII 


A FEW minutes later Princess Maria and Natacha joined 
Peter in the large dining-room. Natacha had recovered her 
composure, and her face had a gravity that he had never before 
seen. All three were suffering under the awkwardness which 
commonly ensues after a serious and intimate conversation. 
They sat down to table without a word; Peter unfolded his 
napkin, and, making up his mind to put an end to a silence 
which, if it were allowed to last, must become painful to all, 
looked round at the two women, who were bent on doing the 
same. Their eyes shone with some revived joy in living, and 
an unconscious admission that grief is not eternal, but may still 
give place to happiness. 

“Will you have a little brandy, count?” said Princess Maria; 
and these simple words sufficed to chase the shadows of the 
past. “And tell us how you managed to live; it is a perfect 
romance from what we have heard.” 

“Oh, yes," he said, with gentle irony. “Things have been 
invented about me that I never saw even in my dreams. I 
am quite amazed at it still; I find myself a person of interest, 
and I do not mind it at all. My friends vie with each other in 
asking me to their houses, and telling me all the details of my 
captivity as they have imagined it.” 

“They say that the burning of Moscow cost you two millions; 
is that true?" 

“Very likely; but I am three times as rich as I was before, 
nevertheless," replied Peter, who was never tired of saying this 


349 


WAR AND PEACE 


to anyone who would listen, in spite of the loss he must incur 
in paying his wife’s debts and rebuilding his houses. “What 
I have gained for good is my liberty? 2:3). [Bathe stopped, 
not wishing to dwell on his merely personal concerns. 

“And you mean to build?” 

"Yes. Savélitch advises it." 

“Where were you when you heard of the countess's death? 
Were you still at Moscow?” But the princess coloured as she 
spoke, fearing lest Peter should attribute a wrong sense to a 
question which seemed to give point to his observations on 
having recovered his liberty. 

“No, I only heard the news at Orel. You may suppose how 
astonished I was. We were not a model couple,” he went on, 
looking at Natacha, and guessing that she would be curious to 
hear what he might say on such a subject; “but her death 
stunned me. When two people cannot agree there are generally 
faults on both sides, and one feels doubly guilty towards the 
dead. ... She died alone, too, without her friends or consola- 
tion. I felt the deepest pity for her... ." And he ceased, 
happy in a feeling that Natacha was approving. 

"So now you are a bachelor on your promotion again," said 
Princess Maria. 

Peter blushed scarlet and looked down. When he raised his 
eyes again, after a long silence, to look at Natacha, he fancied 
her expression was cold and reserved, almost disdainful. 

“And did you really see Napoleon, as we were told?" asked 
Maria. 

"Never," and he burst out laughing. *You might fancy 
that to be a prisoner was synonymous with being Napoleon's 
guest. I never even heard him talked about; I was in far too 
humble company." 

"Now confess," said Natacha, "that when you stayed in 
Moscow it was to kill him. I guessed as much when we met 
you there.” 

Peter admitted that this had in fact been his intention; 
and allowing himself to be led on by their questions, he gave 
them a full account of all his adventures. He spoke at first 
with that light irony that tinged all his opinions of others and 
of himself; but by degrees the remembrance, still so vivid, of 
the sufferings and the horrors he had witnessed gave his speech 
the genuine and reticent emotion that is natural in a man who 
goes back in memory to the scenes of acute interest in which 
he has taken part. 


350 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


Princess Maria looked first at Natacha and then at Peter, 
whose native and thorough goodness of heart was conspicuous 
throughout his story. Natacha, with her elbow on the table 
and her chin resting on her hand, followed every detail with 
varying expression. Her eyes, her exclamations, her brief 
questions, all showed that she fully entered into the real mean- 
ing of what he endeavoured to make them understand; nay, 
better still, the hidden sense of much that he could not utter in 
words. The episode of the rescue of the child and of the woman 
whom he had tried to defend—the immediate cause of his being 
taken prisoner—he related in these words: 

“Tt was a horrible sight; children deserted or left to perish 
in the flames—one was saved before my very eyes. Then the 
women, and soldiers snatching away their dresses-and even 
their ear-rings—” he coloured and paused. “And just then a 
patrol came along and arrested the peasants and all who were 
not plundering, myself among them.” 

* You are not telling the whole story," said Natacha inter- 
rupting him. “You would certainly have... have done 
some good action." 

Peter went on with his tale. When he came to the execution 
of his companions he tried to pass it over lightly, so as to spare 
her such shocking details; but she insisted on hearing every- 
thing. Then came the story of Karataiew. They had done 
supper and rose from table; he paced up and down the room, 
Natacha watching him. 

“You could never guess half of what I learnt from-that man, 
that guileless soul who could neither read nor write.” 

* And what became of him?” asked Natacha. 

“They shot him, almost under my eyes!" And in a voice 
quivering with emotion, he told them of the hapless creature's 
illness and death. 

He himself had never seen his adventures in the light in 
which they now appeared. They bore a new meaning for him; 
and as he narrated them to Natacha he felt the keen pleasure 
which comes of the sympathy, not of a clever woman whose 
sole object is to assimilate what she hears and to enrich the 
stores of her little brain, but of that of a true woman who 
possesses the faculty of bringing out and taking in all that 
is best in a man. Natacha, though unconsciously, was all 
attention. Not a word, not a shade of tone, not a glance, a 
thrill, or a gesture escaped her; she caught his sentences 
half-spoken, as it were in the air, and treasured them in her 


951 


WAR AND PEACE 


heart, divining the mysterious travail that had taken place in 
his soul. 

Princess Maria was interested by all he said, but another 
thought filled her mind: she had just begun to understand that 
Peter and Natacha might love each other and be happy together, 
and it filled her with deep joy. 

It was now three in the morning; the servants came in with 
long faces to bring fresh candles, but no one heeded them. 
Peter brought his story toanend. His honest emotion, stamped 
with some embarrassment, responded to Natacha’s gaze, which 
seemed to be questioning his silence even; and without con- 
sidering the lateness of the hour, he tried to find a fresh subject 
of conversation. 

“We talk of disaster and suffering,” he said, “and yet if any 
one were to ask me: ‘Would you rather be just what you were 
before your imprisonment or go through all you have endured 
once more?’ I should answer: ‘Sooner a thousand times a 
prisoner's life and horseflesh!’ We are prone to fancy that 
everything is wrecked if once we leave the beaten path; in fact 
it is then only that Truth and Goodness are revealed to us. 
While there is life there is happiness. We still have much to 
look forward to—it is for you especially that I say it,” he added, 
turning to Natacha. 

“Very true,” she said, but she was answering another thought 
that had flashed across her mind. "I, too, could ask for 
nothing better than to live my life over again." 

Peter looked at her inquiringly. “N o, I could ask for 
nothing more!" 

“Ts it really possible?” cried Peter. “And am I wrong in 
living and in wishing to live; and you too?” 

Natacha bent her head and melted into tears. 

“Natacha, what ails you?” 

“Nothing, nothing,” she said, smiling at Peter through her 
tears. 

“Good night, it is bedtime,” and Peter rose and left them. 

Princess Maria and Natacha talked for some time after in 
their own room, but neither of them mentioned Peter’s name. 

“Do you know, Maria, that I often fear, lest in never speaking 
of him, for fear of profaning our feelings, we should altogether 
forget him.” 

Princess Maria’s sigh confirmed the accuracy of this observation, 
which she never would have dared to utter. 

“Do you think it is possible to forget?” she said. “It did 


952 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


me so much good to talk it all over to-day; it was both a 
comfort and a pain. I felt that he had truly loved him, and 
so... Was I wrong?" she asked, colouring. 

“Wrong to speak of him to Peter? Ohno! He is so good." 

"Did you notice, Maria," said Natacha presently, with a 
saucy smile that had not been seen on her features for many a 
day—" did you notice how neat and well-dressed he was, and 
how fresh-coloured and rosy? He looks as if he had just 
come out of a moral bath; I mean—but you understand, 
don't you?" 

“Yes, he has altered very much to his advantage. It was 
that which made ‘him’ so fond of him,” said Princess Maria. 

"Yes. And yet they were very unlike. However, they say 
that men's friendships are always between those who are 
contrasts; I suppose it is in the nature of things. Well, good 
night, good night!" said Natacha, and the merry smile with 
which she had spoken long remained on her face. 


CHAPTER CXXVIII 


IT was long before Peter got any sleep. He strode up and 
down his room with an anxious face, shrugging his shoulders, 
starting, and his lips parting as if to make some avowal. Six 
o'clock struck and he was still thinking of Prince Andrew, of 
Natacha, of their mutual love, of which even now he was 
jealous. He went to bed, agitated but happy, having made up 
his mind to do everything within the bounds of human 
possibility to marry her. 

He had fixed Friday for his journey to St. Petersburg, and 
on the following morning Savélitch came to him for orders as 
to his start. 

*St. Petersburg? What, I am going to St. Petersburg? 
What for?" he asked himself in astonishment. “To be sure, 
I had settled it long since; before this had occurred. Yes, and 
perhaps I will really go. What a good face old Savélitch has! 
Well, Savélitch, would you not like to have your freedom? " 

* What should I do with it, excellency? We lived with the 
old count—God rest his soul! And now we live with you, and 
have nothing to complain of." 

“And your children?” 


353 


WAR AND PEACE 


"My children will do as I have done, excellency. With a 
master like you there is nothing to fear.” 

“That is all very well; but my heirs?” said Peter. “If I 
were to marry, for instance? That might happen yet, you 
know,” he added with an involuntary smile. X 

“And a very good thing, I make bold to say, excellency.” 

"How lightly he treats it," thought Peter. “He has no 
idea what a serious, what a terrible thing it is. . . . It is too 
soon, or too late." 

“What orders, excellency? Will you go to-morrow?” 

“No; in a few days. I will let you know when. Forgive 
me for giving you so much trouble. It is odd,” said he to 
himself, “that he should not have guessed that I have nothing 
to do at St. Petersburg, and that thts must be decided first of 
all. Iam sure that he does know it and only makes believe not 
to. Shall I say anything to him about it? No, it will do 
better another time." 

At breakfast Peter told his cousin Catherine that he had 
called on Princess Maria the evening before, and that there, to 
his great surprise, he had met Natacha Rostow. Princess 
Catherine saw nothing in it to be surprised at. 

“Do you know her?" Peter asked. 

“T saw her once; there was some talk of her marrying young 
Rostow: it would have been a good thing for him, for they say 
that the Rostows are ruined." 

“I was not speaking of Princess Maria, but of Natacha." 

“To be sure; I heard her story—a very sad one." 

“Evidently,” thought Peter, “she does not understand, or 
she does not choose to understand. I had better say no more." 

He went to dine with Princess Maria. As he went along 
the streets, where the ruins of the burnt houses still remained 
standing, he could not help admiring them. The tall chimneys 
that towered up in the midst of the rubbish-heaps reminded 
him of the ruins of the banks of the Rhine, or of the Colosseum. 
The coach-drivers and riders, the carpenters squaring joists, 
the shopkeepers and dealers, all the men he met seemed to look 
at him with beaming glances, and say to themselves, “Ah! 
here he is back again; now we shall see what he will do next." 

When he reached the house, he felt as though he had been 
the sport of a dream, and had seen Natacha in his sleep; but 
he had scarcely entered her presence when he felt its influence 
in a thrill throughout his whole being. Though dressed in 
black, as she had been the day before, and with her hair done 


354 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


just the same, her face was different; if she had looked like 
this when they first met, he must have recognised her: she 
had her childish face, her face of a girl-bride. Her eyes were 
bright with an inquiring gleam, and a saucy and particularly 
friendly smile parted her lips. Peter dined with them, and 
would have spent the evening there, but that the ladies were 
going to vespers, so he accompanied them. 

The next day he called again, and stayed so late that, not- 
withstanding their pleasure in his company, and the absorbing 
interest he found in their society, the conversation flagged, 
and turned on the most trivial subjects. Still, Peter could not 
make up his mind to leave, though he felt that they were 
impatient for his departure. Princess Maria, seeing no issue 
to the dilemma, was the first to rise and bid him good-bye, 
excusing herself under the plea of a headache. “So you start 
for St. Petersburg to-morrow?” 

“No, I am not going away,” said Peter, hastily. “At least 
I don’t know; perhaps. At any rate I will call before leaving 
in case you have any commissions.” He was standing up, and 
greatly embarrassed. 

Natacha gave him her hand, and left the room; then Princess 
Maria, dropping into an arm-chair, and fixing him with her 
luminous gaze, watched him attentively. Her fatigue had 
suddenly vanished; it was evident that she was prepared for a 
long talk with him. Peter’s awkwardness and bashfulness had 
also disappeared as if by magic when Natacha went away. He 
hastily pulled a chair forward, and sat down by the princess. 
“T have a confession to make to you,” he began, with con- 
trolled emotion. “I want your help, princess—what am I to 
do, what hope is there for me? I know only too well that I 
am not worthy of her, and this is an ill-chosen time for address- 
ing her. But might I not be like a brother to her? No,” he 
added quickly, *No. I cannot—I will not. I do not know 
how long I have loved her," he went on, after a pause, and with 
a great effort to be coherent, “but I never loved any other 
woman, and I cannot conceive of life without her. Of course 
it is particularly difficult to ask her just now to give me her 
hand; but the thought that she might grant it, and that I may 
be missing an opportunity is more than I can bear. Dear 
princess, is there any hope for me?" 

“You are right," said Princess Maria, “in thinking this an 
ill-chosen time for speaking of your...” But she stopped; 
it struck her that the entire change in Natacha made her 


€ 


355 


WAR AND PEACE 


objections seem improbable; nay, she felt that she would not 
be offended by Peter’s declaration of love—that at the bottom 
of her heart she longed for it; still, she would not yield to a 
mere impulse, and she repeated, “You cannot possibly speak 
of it now, trust in me, I know. . .” 

“What?” said Peter, breathlessly, with an inquiring gaze. 

“T know that she loves you—that she will love you!” The 
words were scarcely spoken, when Peter started to his feet, 
seized her hand, and wrung it hard. 

“You believe it—you say you really believe it?” 

“Yes, I do. Write to her parents. I will speak to her 
about it, all in good time. I sincerely wish it; and my heart 
tells me it will certainly be so.” 

"It would be too great happiness, too great happiness!” 
said Peter, kissing Princess Maria's hands. à 

“Make your journey to St. Petersburg; that will be best, 
and I will write to you, I promise." 

"To St. Petersburg! Now? Well, I will do your bidding. 
But I may come and see you again to-morrow?” 

And Peter went next day to take leave. 

Natacha was quieter than she had been these last days; 
but he, as he looked at her, felt but one thing—the happiness 
that thrilled him, and that increased with every word she 
spoke, every movement or gesture of her person. As he clasped 
her small, thin hand when they were saying good-bye, he 
involuntarily held it for a few seconds. “This hand, that face, 
that treasure of delight, are they really to be mine, mine for 
ever?” 

"Au revoir, count,” she said. “I shall expect your return 
with impatience,” she added, in a lower voice. 

These simple words, and the look that had accompanied 
them, were to Peter an endless source of memories and exquisite 
dreams during his two months’ absence. ‘She said she should 
expect me with impatience!” and at every hour of the day he 
kept saying to himself, “What happiness! What happiness |" 


356 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


CHAPTER CXXIX 


HE felt nothing now of what he had experienced during his 
betrothal to Helen. He then had remembered with shame 
every time he had said to her, “I love you.” Now, on the 
contrary, he thought over every detail of his interview with 
Natacha with exquisite and unmixed delight, repeating her last 
words to himself again and again. He did not think of asking 
himself whether he were doing right or wrong; no shadow of 
a doubt was possible. He dreaded only one thing, lest he 
should have been the sport of an illusion. Was he not too 
presumptuous, too sure of his happiness? Was not Princess 
Maria perhaps mistaken? Might not Natacha say to her with 
a smile: *How very strange! How can he have failed to 
understand that he is no more than a man like any other man, 
while I am so far above him?” Only this doubt constantly 
worried him. He no longer made any plans for the future. 
The happiness that was in store for him seemed so extraordinary 
that there could be nothing beyond it. Everything was bound 
to end. 

The very folly of happiness, which he had believed himself 
incapable of ever feeling again, possessed him wholly. His 
own life and the whole world were summed up for him in his 
love for her, and his hope of being loved by her. He fancied 
he could discern in every face a sympathy which was only 
hindered from expressing itself by other interests. He often 
puzzled those he met by his radiant look and smile of happiness. 
He pitied those who did not understand, and sometimes longed 
to explain to them that they were losing their time in common- 
place futility. When it was proposed to him that he should 
take some office, or when the politics of the day were discussed 
in his presence as exerting some possible influence over the 
happiness of the human race, he listened pityingly, and aston- 
ished his listeners by the oddity of his remarks. But in spite 
of everything the radiance of his soul, throwing its light on 
all who came in his way, enabled him to detect at once what 
there was of good or kindness in each. As he read through his 
wife's papers no feeling but one of deep pity was roused in 
his heart; and in his eyes Prince Basil—so proud of some 
promotion at Court, and a new order—was no more than a 


foolish old man. — 
At the same time the views he held as to men and events 


257 


WAR AND PEACE 


during this period of his life, remained in his mind incontro- 
vertibly true, and often helped him in after life to solve his 
doubts, “I was absurd and odd perhaps at that time,” he 
would say, “but I was not such a fool as I looked. My mind 
was open and keen; I understood what things in life were 
really worth comprehending, because—because I was happy!” 


CHAPTER CXXX 


As to Natacha, from the first evening she had spent in Peter’s 
company, she was greatly changed. Almost without her 
knowing it the sap of life had revived in her heart, and had 
spread, unchecked, throughout her being. Her demeanour, 
her face, her look, her voice, all were metamorphosed. Her 
cravings for happiness had come to the surface, and clamoured 
to be satisfied. From that day forth she seemed to have 
forgotten all antecedent events. Not a complaint ever escaped 
her lips, by no word did she allude to the vanished shades of 
the past, and sometimes she even smiled over plans for the 
future. Though she never mentioned Peter’s name, a flame, 
long since extinct, sparkled in her eyes when Princess Maria 
spoke of him, and she could scarcely control the quivering of 
her lips. 

Princess Maria was struck by the change of which she could 
easily guess the cause; and it pained her. “Did she love my 
brother so little that she can forget him already?” But when 
she saw her she could feel no grudge, could find nothing to 
reproach her for. This reawakening to life was so sudden, so 
irresistible, so entirely unforeseen by Natacha herself, that 
Princess Maria could not feel that she had any right to blame 
her, even in her most secret soul; and Natacha threw herself so 
entirely and so sincerely into this new vein of feeling, that she 
made no attempt to mask the fact that, for her, sorrow had 
given way to gladness. 

When Princess Maria came to her soon after her interview 
with Peter, Natacha met her at the door. “He has spoken, 
has he not—he has told you?” she said, with a look of pathos 
and joy that pleaded for forgiveness. “I longed to listen at 
the door; but I knew you would tell me everything." 

Sincere and appealing as her eyes were, her words nevertheless 
wounded Princess Maria; she thought of her brother. 


358 


THE FRENCH AT MOSCOW 


“But what is to be done?” said she to herself. “It cannot 
be otherwise . . .” and then, in a voice which was at once severe 
and gentle, she repeated her conversation with Peter. 

On hearing that he was leaving for St. Petersburg, Natacha 
exclaimed in surprise; then, guessing that she must have made 
a painful impression on her friend, she asked: “Maria, tell me 
what I ought to do; I am so afraid of being horrid: I will do 
whatever you advise." 

“Do you love him?” 

“Yes,” she murmured. 

“Then what have you to cry for?—I am glad... 
Princess Maria, but she could not check her tears. 

“Tt will not be very soon, Maria.... Think how happy 
we shall be. I shall be his wife and you will marry Nicholas.” 

“Natacha, I begged you never to mention it. We need only 
speak of you.” And they were both silent. 

“But why need he go to St. Petersburg?” Natacha suddenly 
asked; but answering her own question she went on: “It is 
best so—it is best, no doubt. Don’t you think so, Maria?" 


? said 


359 


EPILOGUE 


PART I 
CHAPTER CXXXI 


SEVEN years had passed. The storm-tossed historical sea of 
Europe had sunk to rest upon its shores. Yet, calm though 
it appeared, the mysterious forces which move humanity (forces 
mysterious only because we do not understand the laws which 

govern their action) still continued operative. ^ 

Although the surface of the historical sea seemed motionless— 
seémed as unbroken as the passage of time—humanity still 
moved. Different groups of human combinations continued 
to form or to be dissolved, and the springs which make or 
unmake states and transpose nations continued to be wound. 
The historical sea was no longer driven by squalls from shore 
to shore, but raged only below the surface. Historical figures 
were no longer carried by its waves from coast to coast, but 
revolved in stationary eddies. Historical personages who had 
lately been leading armies and directing the movements of 
popular masses by issuing commands to war, to. campaigns and 
battles, were now directing those movements by means of 
political and diplomatic conventions, laws, and treaties. 

A part of this kind played by historical personages is what 
historians call reaction. In describing the parts played by 
historical personages whom they consider to have been the cause 
of reaction, historians exercise a strict judgment. All the 
well-known figures of the period, from AlexanderI and Napoleon 
to Madame de Staél, Schelling, Chateaubriand, and the rest, 
have been arraigned before that stern tribunal, and acquitted 
or condemned according as they had contributed to progress 
or to reaction. 

Russia too is described by historians as the scene of reaction, 
and for this they throw the chief responsibility upon Alexander 
I—upon the same Alexander I to whom they also give the 
credit for the liberal enterprises of his reign and for the 
salvation of Russia. 

In Russian letters of to-day there is not a man, from the 


360 


EPILOGUE 


gymnasium student to the expert historian, who would not 
throw a stone at Alexander for one or another ill-considered act 
at this period of his reign. 

“He should have done so and so. On such and such an 
occasion he did well, but on such and such another occasion 
he did badly. He bore himself excellently at the beginning, 
as well as in 1812, but he erred in granting Poland a constitu- 
tion, in forming the Holy Alliance, in giving Araktchéiew power, 
in encouraging, first of all, Golitzin and his mysticism, and then 
Shishkoff and Photius. Also he did wrong in interfering with 
the élite of the army—he made a mistake in disbanding the 
Séménovsky Regiment,” and so forth, and so forth. A dozen 
sheets of paper might be filled with the faults which historians 
find with Alexander on the strength of that knowledge of what 
is good for mankind which only historians possess. 

Yet what do these reproaches really amount to? Were not 
the acts for which they blame him (the Holy Alliance, the 
re-establishment of Poland, and the reaction of the twenties) 
due to identically the same sources (the conditions of blood, 
upbringing, and life which made Alexander’s personality what 
it was) as the acts for which they praise him (the liberal enter- 
prises of the early part of his reign, the struggle which he main- 
tained with Napoleon, the firmness which he showed in 1812, 
and the campaign of the following year)? 

What, then, “do these reproaches really amount to? They 
amount to saying that an historical personage such as Alexander 
I—a personage who stood at the highest summit of human 
power—at the focus-point, as it were, of a light which inevitably 
blinded all historical beams which might be turned upon it; 
a personage who was subject to some of the strongest influences 
in the world—the influences of intrigue, chicanery, flattery, 
and self-deception, all of which are inseparable from power; 
a personage who was conscious, every moment of his life, of 
being responsible for all that happened in Europe; a personage 
who was not an imaginary being, but a man alive like his fellows, 
and possessed of his own personal habits, passions, and aspira- 
tions for good, beauty, and truth—I repeat that those reproaches 
amount to saying that this personage of half a century ago 
was, if not wholly destitute of virtue (historians do not accuse 
him of that), at all events without those particular views on 
the subject of the welfare of humanity which a present-day 
professor holds who has applied himself to science from his 
youth upwards—1.e. has applied himself to the reading and 


361 


WAR AND PEACE 


hearing of books and lectures, and to the copying out of such 
books and lectures on paper. 

If, then, we are to suppose that Alexander erred fifty years 
ago in his view of what constitutes the welfare of nations, we 
have no choice also but to suppose that the historian who 
judges Alexander may, at this distance of time, also be erring 
in his view of what constitutes the welfare of humanity. This 
supposition is the more natural and inevitable in that, as we 
trace the growth of history, we see that, with each successive 
year and each successive new writer, a change always takes 
place in the accepted view of what constitutes the welfare of 
humanity, so that what seemed good, say, ten years ago may 
seem evil now, and vice versa. In fact, history reveals to us 
many contemporary, yet utterly opposed, views of what con- 
stitutes good or evil. Thus some persons place the Holy 
Alliance and the granting of a constitution to Poland to 
Alexander’s credit, while others blame him for those two acts. 

Neither of Alexander’s nor of Napoleon’s conduct can it be 
said that it was either beneficial or harmful, seeing that we 
cannot say precisely what benefited from or what was harmed 
by them. If their conduct does not meet with the approval of 
a given individual, it does not do so simply because it does not 
happen to coincide with his limited comprehension of what 
constitutes good. Suppose I consider to be good the preserva- 
tion of my father’s house in Moscow in 1812, or regard as 
progress the glory won by the Russian forces, or the flourishing 
condition of St. Petersburg (or any other) university, or the 
emancipation of Poland, or the might of Russia, or the equili- 
brium of Europe, or any given branch of European civilisation, 
it still remains for me to confess that the conduct of each actor 
in these events may have had other and more general aims in 
view—aims which, to me, are unfathomable. 

Yet suppose also that what we call science can reconcile all 
contradictions, and that for historical persons and events it 
has an unchanging standard of good and evil. Suppose also 
that Alexander might have done everything differently, and 
followed the prescription of those who blame him and those 
who profess knowledge of the ultimate ends of the movements 
of humanity by ordering his conduct according to the pro- 
gramme of nationality, freedom, equality, and progress (for 
there would seem to be no other) with which his accusers of 
to-day would have provided him. Finally, suppose that that 
programme had been possible, and formulated, and that 


362 


/ 


EPILOGUE 


Alexander had followed it—well, what then would have become 
of the conduct of all who opposed the policy of the Government 
of that time—of the conduct which historians declare to have 
been solely good and useful? That conduct would never have 
been: life would never have been: nothing would ever have 
been. 

For if we allow that human life is always guided by reason, 
we destroy the premise that life is possible at all. 


CHAPTER CXXXII 


Ir, also, we allow, as historians do, that only great men enable 
humanity to attain such ends as the aggrandisement, say, of 
Russia or France, or the equilibrium of Europe, or the diffusion 
of revolutionary ideas, or general progress, or anything else, 
it at once becomes impossible for us to explain the phenomena 
of history without certain ideas on the subject of chance and 
genius. 

If the aim of the European wars of the opening years of this 
century was the aggrandisement of Russia, that aim could have 
been attained without the preceding wars and without invasion. 
If that aim was the aggrandisement of France, that aim could 
have been attained without either the Revolution or the Empire. 
If that aim was the spreading of ideas, it could have been 
fulfilled much better through the Press than by soldiers. If 
that aim was the progress of civilisation, then we may reason- 
ably suppose that there exist other and much more suitable 
ways of extending civilisation than by the extermination of 
human beings and their possessions. 

Why, then, did these things happen thus, and not otherwise? 
Simply because they did so happen. 

“Chance made the position: genius used it,” says history. 
But what is this “chance,” this “genius?” 

The terms “chance” and “genius” connote nothing that 
really exists, and therefore lie beyond definition. They con- 
note merely a degree of comprehension of phenomena. Not 
knowing why a given phenomenon occurs, I suppose that I 
cannot know: wherefore I do not wish to know, and merely 
say to myself: “It is chance.” I see a force which produces 
action out of all proportion to the general characteristics of 


363 


WAR AND PEACE 


humanity, and, not knowing whence it arises, I say to myself: 
“Tt is genius." 

The sheep which the shepherd puts into a separate pen every 
night, so that that sheep becomes twice as fat as its fellows, 
would seem to be a genius; and the circumstance that every 
night that particular sheep is put into a separate pen instead 
of into the common fold, until at last it becomes sufficiently 
clothed in fat to make good mutton, would seem to be a striking 
conjunction of the quality known as genius with a series of 
fortuitous happenings. 

Yet the other sheep need only rid themselves of the idea that 
all that is done to them is being done solely for the furtherance 
of their sheepish ends, as well as to concede that events affecting 
them may have aims beyond their comprehension, for them at 
once to see the unity, the consecutiveness, of what is occurring _ 
also to their fattened comrade. Although it may not be given 
to them to know to what end he is being fattened, they will at 
least know that his fate is not overtaking him casually, and 
thus will have no need of the idea either of chance or of genius. 

Similarly, as soon as we confess that we do not know what 
the aim of those bygone disturbances among the European 
nations can have been, but that we know only the hard facts 
envisaged in the killings which then took place (firstly in France, 
and, later, in Italy, Africa, Prussia, Austria, Spain, and Russia), 
as well as that a movement from west to east and from east to 
west constitutes the whole substance and aim of those events, 
we shall no longer find it necessary to see any exceptionality or 
genius in the characters of Alexander and Napoleon, nor be able 
to regard those two personages as having been in any way dis- 
similar to their fellows. Not only shall we have no need to 
explain the accidentalness of the minor events which made those 
men what they were, but it will become clear to us that those 
minor events were inevitable. 

If, therefore, we renounce all knowledge of the final aim of 
things, we shall realise that, just as one cannot invent for a 
plant new growths, new seeds or flowers, which shall be the 
counterpart of those which it already produces, so it would be 
impossible for us to imagine two men with a past corresponding 
exactly and in absolute minuteness of detail to the destiny 
which it fell to the lot of Alexander and Napoleon to fulfil. 


364 


EPILOGUE 


CHAPTER CXXXIII 


THE real, the fundamental essence of European events at the 
beginning of this century lies in the fact that a warlike move- 
ment by a massed body of European nations took place from 
west to east, and again from east to west. For the forces of 
the west to be able to carry out the warlike movement upon 
Moscow which they accomplished it was necessary—(r) That 
they should combine into a military group of dimensions capable 
of sustaining the shock of collision with the military group of 
the east; (2) That they should renounce all established customs 
and traditions; and (3) That for the carrying out of their war- 
like movement they should have at their head a man able, both 
for their sake and his own, to justify the lies, plundering, and 
killing which were to be the concomitants of that movement. 

Thus, beginning with the French Revolution, we see an old 
group of inadequate dimensions becoming broken up, and old 
customs and traditions being abolished. Next, a group of 
adequate dimensions becomes formed, new customs and tradi- 
tions developed, and the way prepared for the man who was to 
stand at the head of the coming movement, and to take upon 
himself the responsibility for all the events that were to happen. 
Finally, a man without convictions, without habits, without 
traditions, without a name—not even a Frenchman—was, by 
what would appear to be an extraordinary series of chances, to 
thrust himself into the midst of the various parties agitating 
France, and, though not an adherent of any one of them, to 
raise himself to a unique position. 

The ignorance of his colleagues, the weakness and insignifi- 
cance of his opponents, the wholesale intrigues and splendid 
self-assurance of this man brought him to the head of the army, 
while the brilliant personnel of the Italian forces, the unwilling- 
ness of his opponents to fight him, and his own childish insolence 
and belief in himself soon won him military glory. A countless 
number of so-called chances aided him everywhere. Even the 
bad odour into which he fell with the directors of France only 
went in his favour. All his attempts to alter the course to 
which he was predestined were unsuccessful. Russia would 
not take him into her service, and his appointment to Turkey 
was a failure. More than once during the war in Italy he found 
himself on the brink of disaster, yet he escaped each time by 
some unlooked for chance. As for the Russian forces—the 


365 


WAR AND PEACE 


forces which might have shattered his glory—diplomatic con- 
siderations prevented them from entering Europe while he was 
there. 

On his return from Italy he found the Parisian government 
in that stage of dissolution which means the inevitable sup- 
pression and extinction of any man who falls foul of such a 
government. Neverthelessa meansof escape from this dangerous 
position presented itself in the shape of the senseless, inexplicable 
expedition to Africa. Again a series of so-called chances attended 
Napoleon throughout. Impregnable Malta surrendered without 
a shot, and the most rashly conceived of enterprises were 
invariably crowned with success. To add to that, the enemy's 
fleet, which never afterwards let a ship escape it, now suffered 
a whole army to pass through its lines. In Africa a series of 
outrages was perpetrated upon the almost defenceless inhabitants, 
yet the men who committed the deeds, and especially their 
leader, told themselves that it was splendid, that it was glory, 
that it was what Cesar and Alexander of Macedon had done, 
and that it was right to do so. 

The ideal of this leader and of those attached to him was the 
ideal which consists in never admitting that one has done 
wrong, but in boasting of one's crime and attributing to it some 
unknown supernatural meaning. This ideal attained wide 
development in Africa. Likewise, all that Napoleon did not do 
was in his favour. The plague never touched him. The guilt 
for the foul putting of prisoners to death was never brought 
home to him. His childishly incautious, unwarrantable, and 
ignoble departure from Africa—that is to say, from his comrades 
in distress—was reckoned to his credit. Once again the enemy’s 
fleet let him slip through its lines. Finally he returned to 
Paris—his head turned with the deeds he had performed or had 
been permitted by fortune to perform—at the very moment 
when the republican government, which, a year ago, could have 
destroyed him, had come to the end of its tether, and when his 
presence—the presence of a man free from parties—might, if 
anything, help to restore it. 

He had no plan to propose and was afraid of everyone, but 
the parties seized upon him and demanded his co-operation. 
He alone, with the ideal of glory and greatness which he had 
formulated in Italy and Egypt, his craze for self-glorification, 
his pride in his enormities, and his sincerity of deceit, could 
undertake the direction of what was to be done. He was the 
only man for the place awaiting him, and therefore, almost 


366 


EPILOGUE 


involuntarily, and despite his vacillation, his absence of a plan, 
and his innumerable blunders, he was drawn into a conspiracy 
which had for its object the seizure of power. That conspiracy 
was crowned with success. 

Yet, when dragged before the directors in council, he was 
panic-stricken and tried to flee, for he thought himself lost. 
He pretended to be fainting, and then started babbling non- 
sense which would have ended his career then and there had not 
the directors of France, formerly so proud and derisive, been 
conscious that they were on their last legs, and so had their 
minds as confused as he. Consequently the word was never 
spoken which would have destroyed him and retained power in 
their own hands. It was chance—millions of chances—which 
invested him with authority, and which made everyone, as it 
were, conspire to aid in the consolidation of that authority. It 
was chance which formed the characters of the then admini- 
strators of France who gave way to him; it was chance which 
formed the character of Paul I, who recognised his power; it 
was chance which formed the conspiracy against him which 
not only failed to injure him, but even strengthened his position. 
It was chance which delivered Enghien into his hands and 
suddenly suggested to him the idea of killing his prisoner as the 
best and most effective method of convincing the populace 
that he (Napoleon) had right on his side because he had power. 
It was chance which made him strain every nerve to effect the 
invasion of England—the very enterprise which would, in all 
probability, have ruined him—yet never to carry out that 
intention, but, instead, to make a sudden movement against 
Mack and his Austrains, who surrendered to him without a 
blow. It was chance and genius combined which gave him 
the victory at Austerlitz, and it was chance which made all men 
—not only the French, but the whole of Europe except England, 
which took no part in those events—forget their former horror 
and detestation of his acts, and recognise both his power over 
them, the title which he had assumed, and the ideal of glory 
and greatness which he had invented—an ideal which now 
seemed to them something reasonable and splendid. 

Several times during the years 1805-09 the forces of the 
west tried and practised their powers by making sallies east- 
wards, in proportion as their strength and mobility grew. 
Next, in 1811 a great body of men who had formed a union 
in France effected a junction with certain nations of central 
Europe, and became, with them, one large group. As this 


367 


WAR AND PEACE 


group increased in strength, so also did the man who stood at 
the head of the movement increase in power. During the ten 
years’ preparation which preceded the great movement this 
man held converse with all the crowned heads in Europe. The 
unmasked rulers of the world had no reasonable, no intelligible, 
ideal to oppose to the Napoleonic ideal of glory and greatness. 
One by one they vied in showing him their inferiority. The 
King of Prussia sent his wife to beg the great man’s favour. The 
Emperor of Austria took it as a favour that the great man 
should receive to his nuptial bed a daughter of kaisers. The 
Pope, the keeper of the morals of the nations, thought, for- 
sooth, he served his faith by aiding in the elevation of Napoleon! 
In short, it was not Napoleon himself who carried out his own 
training for assumption of sole responsibility for what was 
happening and to happen, but everyone around him. There. 
was not a blunder on his part, not an enormity nor a petty 
piece of trickery, that was not at once represented in the mouths 
of his entourage as a great act. The best féte days the Germans 
can think of to please him are the celebrations of the victories 
of Jena and Austerlitz. Moreover, not only was Napoleon 
himself great, but also his forefathers, his brothers, his step- 
children, his sons-in-law! Everything was done to deprive him 
of the last vestige of reason, and to prepare him for his unique 
role. By the time that he was ready for it his forces also were 
ready. 

The invading army pressed eastwards until the final goal, 
Moscow, was reached. The capital fell, and the Russian army 
was annihilated even more completely than the enemy's forces 
had ever been in all the previous battles, from Austerlitz to 
Wagram. Yet suddenly, in place of the chances and genius 
which had hitherto attended him with such consistency and in 
such unbroken progress towards the appointed goal, there 
began to manifest itself a countless series of reverse chances, 
from the cold in the head at Borodino to the flames which 
consumed Moscow, while, in place of genius, there showed itself 
only stupidity, a cowardice, which is without parallel. 

The invading force began to flee—was turned back, and 
again fled, while all the chances were now against it instead of 
in its favour. A return movement was begun from east to 
west which bore a striking similarity to the movement which 
had taken place from west to east. The main operation was 
preceded by the same tentative sallies westwards as had been 
made towards the east during the years 1805-09, while we also 


368 


EPILOGUE 


see the same linking up of forces into a group of huge dimensions, 
the same adhesion of the mid-European nations to the move- 
ment, the same vacillation half-way, and the same headlong 
rush as the forces approached the goal of their return. 

That goal, Paris, was reached, but Napoleon’s government 
and army lay shattered. Napoleon himself seemed to have no 
further meaning, and all his actions now appear pitiful and 
mean. Nevertheless, another inexplicable chance was to mani- 
fest itself at this juncture. The allies hated Napoleon, in whom 
they saw the cause of all their misfortunes, so that he ought 
then to have appeared to them-—now that he stood deprived of 
power and detected in his wiles and villainies—what he had 
appeared to them ten years earlier—namely, an outlaw and a 
brigand. Yet a strange chance ordained that no oné should see 
him thus. Evidently his role was not yet finished. The man 
whom ten years earlier (as also a year later) they had hailed as 
an outlaw and a brigand they now banished to an island only 
two days’ journey from Paris—an island where he ruled, had 
his own guard, and was permitted to retain the millions which 
had been paid him for some reason or other. 


CHAPTER CXXXIV 


THEN the turmoil of the nations began to subside upon its 
shores. The breakers of the great storm retreated, and on the 
calm surface remained only a few eddies in which diplomatists 
busied themselves, in the belief that it was they who had 
quieted the disturbance. 

Suddenly the tranquil sea became restive again. The 
diplomatists imagined themselves and their differences to be 
the cause of this new upheaval of the elements. They looked 
upon war as bound to break out among their masters, and 
regarded the present situation as uncertain. Yet the wave 
which they felt to be approaching was not coming from the 
quarter expected. It was the same wave as before, and its 
source the same point as before—namely, Paris. The last 
phase of the movement from the west was about to be accom- 
plished—the phase which was to decide the seemingly insoluble 
difficulties of diplomacy, and put an end to the warlike 
movements of the period. 

Alone, without a commission, without soldiers, the man who 


369 


WAR AND PEACE 


had wasted France was returning to her shores. Any gendarme 
might have apprehended him, yet by some extraordinary chance 
not only was that never done, but everyone went out to greet 
with acclamations the man whom yesterday they had abjured, 
and whom but a month later they were to abjure again. That, 
man was necessary for the direction of the final, the crowning, 
operation. 

The operation was performed and the last act played. Then 
the chief actor was bidden divest himself of his costume, and 
wash the rouge and antimony from his face. He was needed no 
longer. 

For a few years this man, alone on his lonely island, played 
a sorry comedy to himself, lied and intrigued as he strove to 
justify his actions now that justification was no longer necessary, 
and showed the whole world what men had taken for strength. 
so long as it had been guided by an unseen hand. 

The Dispenser of all had ended the drama and stripped the 
chief actor of his motley, so that he stood revealed to the world. 

“Look,” said the Dispenser. “This is he in whom you have 
believed. There he stands. See you now that it was not he, 
but I, who moved you?” Yet so blinded were men by the 
force of the movement that it was long before they understood 
this. 

The life of Alexander I—of the man who headed the counter- 
movement from east to west — furnishes us with an equally 
striking example of consecutiveness and destiny. 

What did the man need who towered above all others in the 
direction of the movement westwards? He had need of a sense 
of justice, as well as of a close familiarity with the affairs of 
Europe—a detached familiarity, however, not one clouded with 
petty interests. He had need also of a moral elevation over 
his allies, the other rulers of the day, as well as of a benign and 
attractive personality and a personal grudge against Napoleon. 
All this Alexander I possessed. All this had been added to 
him by the countless so-called chances of his previous life—by 
his upbringing and libera! views, by the councillors who stood 
near him, by Austerlitz, Tilsit, and Erfurt. 

So long as the war was a national one this actor took no part 
in it, since he was unnecessary, but as soon as ever a general 
European war was seen to be inevitable, this actor appeared in 
his place at the proper moment, and, uniting the European 
nations in one, led them to their goal. 

The goal was reached, and, the final battle of 1815 having 


370 


EPILOGUE 


been fought, Alexander found himself at the summit of human 
power. How did he use that position? 

The man who was the peacemaker of Europe, who from his. 
earliest years had striven only for the good of his people, who 
had been the chief defender of liberal innovations in his country, 
who, now that he possessed the utmost measure of power, 
possessed also the utmost capacity for benefiting his nation 
while the exiled Napoleon was making childish, knavish plans 
for desolating humanity if ever the chance should come to him 
again—the man, Alexander I, who had thus fulfilled his destiny, 
felt the hand of God upon him, and, suddenly recognising the 
nothingness of the evanescent power that was his, turned away 
from it, and committed it into the hands of men whom he 
despised, with the words: 

“Not unto me, not unto me, but unto Thy Name! I am 
even such a man as yourselves. Suffer me, therefore, to live 
my life as a man, and to think of my soul and of God.” 


Just as the sun and every particle of the ether is a sphere 
complete in itself, as well as only one atom in a purpose which 
lies beyond the comprehension of humanity, so also does every 
personality bear within itself its own purposes, as well as contain 
them that they may serve general purposes which lie beyond 
all human comprehension. 

If a bee, settling upon a flower, stings a child, the child becomes 
afraid of all bees, and declares that their purpose is to sting 
people. The poet, however, loves to see the bee drinking from 
the chalices of the flowers, and says that the purpose of bees 
is to gather nectar for themselves. The bee-keeper, on the 
other hand, remarking how the bee not only gathers pollen, 
but also carries it away to its hive, declares that the purpose 
of bees is to make honey, while one of his craft who had studied 
the life of the swarm more closely says that bees collect pollen 
in order to feed their young and produce queens, i.e., to continue 
their species. Finally, the botanist, noticing that the fact of 
a pollen-laden bee settling upon the pistil of a flower fertilises 
the plant, concludes that that is the ultimate purpose of the 
insect. Nevertheless the ultimate purpose of bees is not 
exhausted by any such purposes as the human mind may 
conceive of it. The higher the human intellect soars in its con- 
ception of possible purposes, the more does it realise that such 
purposes lie beyond its comprehension. —— | 

Man cannot rise beyond a certain insight into the correlation. 


o 


WAR AND PEACE 


of the bee’s life with certain other phenomena of life. So also 
with the purposes for which historical personages and nations 
exist. 


CHAPTER CXXXV 


NaTACHA's and Bésoukhow’s wedding (which took place in 
1813) was the last festive occasion to occur in the ancient family 
of the Rostows. The same year Count Ilia Andréiévitch died, 
and, as is usual in such cases, his decease caused the household 
to decline. 

The events of the previous year—the burning of Moscow, the 
flight from the city, the death of Prince Andrew, Natacha's. 
despair, the death of Pétia, and the countess's grief for him— 
had descended in successive blows upon the head of the aged 
count. He seemed neither to understand nor to make an 
effort to understand the meaning of those events, but, meekly 
bowing his head, appeared to be waiting only in the hope 
that further blows of fortune might finish him. He seemed 
cowed and distraught, yet unnaturally excited and restless. 

For a while Natacha's marriage occupied his external self. 
He ordered the wedding breakfast and dinner, and seemed all 
the time to be trying to seem cheerful, but his cheerfulness was 
not as infectious as it had once been, and aroused only com- 
passion in those who knew and loved him. When Peter and 
his wife had left the house the old count broke down altogether, 
and fell to bewailing his misfortunes. A few days later he was 
seized with sickness, and took to his bed. From the first day 
of his malady he knew that, despite all the doctor's assurances, 
he would never rise from that bed again. For two weeks the 
countess never took her clothes off, but spent the nights on a 
sofa at his bed-head. Each time that she gave him medicine 
he would burst into sobbing, and silently kiss her hand. On 
the last day of his life he besought her with tears that she and 
his absent son would pardon him for his squandering of the 
family property—the chief fault of which he felt himself guilty, 
and then, having received the last unction and absolution, 
passed peacefully away. Next day the throng of acquaintances 
who came to pay their last respects to the deceased filled the 
hired flat of the Rostows to overflowing. All these people who 
had so often danced or dined at his house, as well as laughed 


372 


EPIEOGUE 


at him, now said to themselves with a unanimous feeling of 
compunction and regret: “Yes, taking him all in all, he was 
a fine man. We do not often meet such men nowadays. We 
all have our weaknesses, have we not?" This was because 
the count's death took place just when his affairs had become 
so involved that no one knew how things would have ended 
if they had continued so for another year. 

Nicholas was with the Russian troops in Paris when the news 
of his father's death came. He at once resigned his commission, 
and, without waiting for the resignation to be accepted, set 
out for Moscow. The position of the count's affairs was ascer- 
tained about a month later, and astounded everyone with the 
immensity of the aggregate of small debts of which no one had 
suspected the existence. Indeed, they amounted to twice as 
much as the property itself. 

Relations and friends alike advised Nicholas to surrender 
the inheritance, but he considered that such a course would 
look like a slur on the hallowed memory of his dead father, and 
therefore declined the suggestion, and accepted full responsibility 
for the liabilities. 

The creditors—who had kept silence during the count's life- 
time, under the indefinable, yet powerful, spell of his universal 
benevolence—now suddenly, and with one consent, presented 
their claims to Nicholas. Emulation of this kind—emulation 
to be the first paid—is common enough, and the same people 
who, like Mitenka and certain others, had received presents of 
bills now showed themselves the most insistent of creditors. 
They granted Nicholas neither rest nor respite, and the men 
who had compassion upon the old man who had been the 
cause of all their losses (if losses they were) now threw them- 
selves pitilessly upon the innocent young heir who had volun- 
tarly assumed responsibility for payment. Not one of the 
schemes put forward by Nicholas was accepted. The property 
was sold under the hammer, and fetched about half its value, 
while fully half the outstanding debts still remained unpaid. 
Nicholas accepted 30,000 roubles offered him on loan by his 
brother-in-law, Bésoukhow, for the purpose of paying off those 
debts which he recognised to be actual monetary obligations, 
while, as regards the rest, he sought to escape the dungeon 
with which the creditors threatened him by entering public 
service again. 

For him to return to the army—where he had been next on 
the rota for the first colonelcy which should fall vacant—was 


373 


WAR AND PEACE 


out of the question, since his mother now clung to him as her 
one joy in life. Consequently, despite his reluctance to remain 
in Moscow surrounded by people who had always known him, 
as well as to enter the civil branch of the service, he obtained 
a departmental post in Moscow, and, doffing his beloved uniform, 
removed, with his mother and Sonia, to a smaller flat. 

At this time Natacha and Peter were living in St. Petersburg, 
and had but a dim idea of Nicholas’ position, seeing that, when 
he borrowed the money of his brother-in-law, he had striven 
all he could to conceal from him the real state of affairs. His 
plight was all the worse in that his salary of 1200 roubles not 
only had to support himself, Sonia, and his mother, but also 
to support his mother in such a way that she should never 
discover that they had become poor. The countess could not 
conceive life as possible without the conditions of luxury to 
which she had always been accustomed from her childhood, 
and, not knowing how hard things were for her son, would keep 
demanding, first of all a carriage for some friend to be sent for 
in, then expensive cookery for herself and wines for her son, 
and lastly, money for her to make surprise gifts to himself, 
Natacha, and Sonia. 

Sonia did the housekeeping, went shopping for her aunt, 
read aloud to her, bore with her caprices and secret indisposition, 
and helped Nicholas to conceal from her the state of poverty 
in which they were now placed. Nicholas felt that he owed 
her a debt which he could never adequately repay for all she 
did for his mother. Yet, though charmed with her patience 
and devotion, he strove to keep away from her. In his heart 
of hearts he had a kind of grudge against her for being so 
thorough—for never giving him the least occasion to find fault 
with her. She had every quality in her which people usually 
value, yet nothing that could make him love her. He felt 
always that the more he valued her, the less he loved her. He 
had taken her literally in the letter by which she had given 
him his freedom, and now treated her as though all that had 
been between them had long ago sunk into oblivion and could 
never possibly be repeated. 

His financial position gradually became worse and worse. 
The idea of saving anything out of his salary now seemed to 
him only an empty dream. Not only did he save nothing what- 
ever, but the task of satisfying his mother's demands caused 
him to incur small debts. Nor, for that matter, could he see 
any way out of his troubles. The idea of marrying a rich 


374 


EPILOGUE 


heiress—the suggestion of his relatives—was abhorrent to him. 
Another possible deliverance from his position—the death of 
his mother—-never even entered his head. He wished for 
nothing, and hoped for nothing, but took a vague, grim pleasure 
in bearing his lot with resignation. Old acquaintances, with 
their expressions of condolence and offers of insulting help, he 
pointedly avoided, and all amusement or distraction he also 
eschewed. Even at home he allowed himself no relaxation 
beyond an occasional game at cards with his mother, silent 
pacings of his room, and the smoking of endless pipes. He 
seemed determined to preserve the mood in which alone he felt 
that he could bear his misfortunes. 


CHAPTER CXXXVI 


EARLY that winter Princess Maria arrived in Moscow. Gossip 
of the town soon informed her of the position of the Rostows— 
of the fact that (so said the quidnuncs) “the son was sacrificing 
himself for the mother." 

“Tt is just what I should have expected him to do,” said the 
princess to herself, feeling a joyous revival of her love for 
Nicholas. Remembering her former intimate relations—the 
relations almost of a kinswoman—with his family, she decided 
that it was her duty to go and call upon the Rostows. Yet 
when she also remembered her former relations with Nicholas 
at Voronége, she felt afraid to do so. At length, a few weeks 
after her arrival in town, she nerved herself to the effort, and 
went to call upon the family. 

Nicholas was the first to greet her, for the countess's room 
could only be reached through his own. No sooner had he 
glanced at her than, in place of the expression of pleasure which 
the princess had expected to see there, his face assumed an air 
of cold austerity and pride which she had never before seen it 
wear. He inquired after her health, and then conducted her 
to his mother's room, where he sat with them for a few minutes, 
and then departed. 

When the princess took her leave of the countess, Nicholas 
again met her in the ante-room, and escorted her with marked 
gravity and formality to the door. To some remark of hers 
about the countess's health he returned no answer whatever. 
*What business have you here? Leave us in peace," was 
what his glance seemed to say. 


975 


WAR AND PEACE 


“What can she want here? I cannot bear these grand 
ladies and their civilities!” he said to Sonia in a burst of anger 
which he seemed unable to control, immediately that the 
princess’s carriage had driven away from the building. 

“Oh, how can you say that, Nicholas?” answered Sonia, 
scarcely able to conceal her delight. “She is so kind, and 
mamma likes her so much." 

To this Nicholas said nothing, and tried never to mention the 
princess's name again, but from that day onwards the countess 
was for ever talking of her, praising her, demanding that Nicholas 
should go and call upon her, and expressing a wish to see her 
more frequently. At such times the countess always seemed a 
little disturbed in her mind. 

Nicholas endeavoured to say nothing while his mother was 
talking in this strain, but his silence only vexed the old lady. 

"She is a most excellent and deserving girl," she once said 
to him, “and you ought to go and see her. At all events you 
ought to see someone occasionally, for I am sure it must be dull 
for you here with us alone." 

“T have no desire to see her, mother." 

“Once upon a time you were eager enough to do so, yet now 
you say, ‘I have no desire to see her, I do not understand 
you, my dear boy. You find it dull here, yet you suddenly 
decide to see no one." 

* [ did not say that I found it dull here." 

“Well, at all events you say that you do not wish to see her 
again. She is a very praiseworthy girl, and you used to like 
her once upon a time. Yet now you suddenly find reasons for 
avoiding her. People keep things so secret from me." 

* Oh no, mother." 

“Tf I had asked you to do something unpleasant I could have 
understood your refusal, but I only asked you to go and call 
uponher. Mere civility demands that. Well, I have asked you, 
but in future I shall leave you alone since you keep secrets from 
your mother.” 

“Well, I will go if you wish.” 

“Oh, it does not matter to me. I only wished it for your 
own sake.” 

Nicholas sighed and bit his moustache. Then he dealt out 
the cards, in the hope of distracting his mother’s attention from 
the subject. Yet, the next day, and the next, and the next, the 
same conversation was repeated. 

After her visit to the Rostows and the unexpected, cold 


376 


EPILOGUE 


reception there accorded her by Nicholas, Princess Maria told 
herself that she had been right in feeling reluctant to call: 

“Tt was just what I ought to have expected,” she reflected as 
she summoned her pride to her aid. “It was not Nicholas that 
I wished to see at all, but his old mother, who has always been 
kind to me, and to whom I am much indebted.” 

Yet she could not soothe herself with these reflections. A 
feeling akin to regret disturbed her whenever she thought of 
her visit. Although she had firmly resolved never to see the 
Rostows again and to forget the matter altogether, she somehow 
felt undecided about it. Each time that she asked herself what 
was worrying her so much, she found herself forced to confess 
that it was her encounter with Nicholas. His cold, punctilious 
tone could not proceed from his real feelings towards her (she 
felt sure of that), but concealed something else. What that 
something else was she must find out. Until she did so she 
knew that she would never know peace. 

One day in mid-winter she was sitting in the schoolroom and 
superintending her nephew's lessons when she was informed 
that Nicholas had called. With a fixed determination not to 
betray her secret or evince any sign of her agitation she sum- 
moned Mademoiselle Bourrienne, and proceeded with her to 
the drawing-room. 

The first glance at Nicholas’ face showed her that he had 
merely come to pay the bare debt which civility demanded, and 
therefore she made up her mind to adopt the same tone to him 
as he adopted to herself. They discussed the countess’s health, 
mutual acquaintances, and the latest news of the war, and as 
soon as the prescribed ten minutes of an afternoon call had 
elapsed, Nicholas rose to take his Jeave. With the help of 
Mademoiselle Bourrienne the princess had sustained the con- 
versation well enough, but just at the last moment, when 
Nicholas was rising to go, such a weariness of speaking of 
matters of no moment to her, and such a sense of wonder that 
life should have so little pleasure to offer her alone came 
over her that she sank into a fit of abstraction, and sat 
motionless, with her brilliant eyes staring straight in front 
of her, and her thoughts oblivious of the fact that he had risen 
to go. ge : 
Nicholas glanced at her, and, not wishing to appear conscious 
of her reverie, said a few words to Mademoiselle Bourrienne, 
and then glanced at the princess again. She was still seated 
motionless, while her tender face bore a look of suffering. 


bya 


WAR AND PEACE 


Suddenly he felt sorry for her, and a dim idea entered his mind 
that perhaps he was the cause of that suffering. He wanted 
to help her, to say something pleasant to her, but could not 
think what to utter. 

“Good-bye, princess,” he said at last. 

She recovered herself, sat up, and gave a deep sigh. 

“Pardon me,” she murmured like one awakening from sleep. 
“Are you going already? Well, good-bye. Have you got my 
cushion for the countess?” 

“Wait a moment, and I will fetch it," said Mademoiselle 
Bourrienne, and left the room. 

Both remained silent a while, and scarcely even glanced at 
one another. 

“Yes, princess,” said Nicholas at last, with a mournful smile. 
“Tt does not seem a very long time, yet how much water has. 
flowed away to the sea since you and I first saw one another 
at Bogoutcharovo! And how unhappy we both seem now! 
What would I not give to recall that time? Yet it will never 
come back.” 

The princess looked him straight in the eyes with her brilliant 
ones as he said this. She was trying to divine the secret mean- 
ing of his words—the meaning which would make plain to her 
his feelings towards herself. 

“Yes, yes,” she replied. “But you have no cause to regret 
the past. If I understand your present life aright, you will 
always be able to look back upon it with pleasure, since the 
life of renunciation which you are now leading 2 

"No, no, I cannot accept your praise," he interrupted 
hurriedly. “On the contrary, I blame myself every day. 
However, this is neither a cheerful nor an interesting con- 
versation," and he broke off, while his face assumed its old 
stern, cold expression. Yet the princess had seen in him the 
same man as she had formerly known and loved, and it was to 
that man that she again addressed herself. 

"I had hoped that you would not mind my saying this to 
you," she said. “TI used to know you so well—and your family 
too, that I thought you would not think my sympathy mis- 
placed: but it seems I was mistaken." Her voice had begun 
to tremble all of a sudden. “Somehow,” she went on, 
recovering herself, “you seem different now, and ———" 

“There are a thousand reasons why,” he said quietly—and 
he laid a particular emphasis on the “why.” ‘Nevertheless 
I thank you, princess. Sometimes things are hard for me.” 


378 


EPILOGUE 


“Then that is why, that is why!” cried a voice in the inmost 
depths of the princess’s soul. “Yes, it was not that brave, kind, 
open-hearted face of his only—that handsome form—that I fell 
in love with. -I guessed also his proud, noble, self-sacrificing 
character. Yes, he is poor now, and I am rich. That is why. 
If only things were not so!" And as she called to mind his 
former tenderness, and gazed upon his manly, sorrowful, 
countenance, she suddenly divined the reason of all his 
coldness. 

“But why, count?—but why?” suddenly came from her 
almost like a cry as she made an involuntary movement towards 
him. “Tell me why. You must tell me why." (He still 
remained silent) “JI do not understand your ‘why.’ It is 
for me—for me—that things are so hard. Yes, I do not mind 
confessing it to you. For some reason you wish to deprive me 
of our old friendship, and that hurts me." (There were tears 
in her eyes and in her voice) "I have so little happiness in my 
life that every loss hurts me. No, but pardon me—do not 
mind me," and, suddenly bursting into sobbing, she moved 
away towards the door. 

* Princess! One moment, for God's sake!" he cried as he 
tried to intercept her. ''Princess!" 

She looked round, and for a moment they stood gazing silently 
into one another's eyes. Then all at once what had seemed 
remote and impossible before became now both possible and 
inevitable. . . . 


CHAPTER CXXXVII 


NicHoLAS married the Princess Maria in the autumn of 1813, 
and went with his wife, his mother, and Sonia to live at Lissy- 
Gory. Four years later, and without selling any of his wife's 
property, he had paid off the remainder of his small debts, and, 
being also left a legacy by a cousin, repaid Peter his principal. 
By 1820, indeed, he had rehabilitated his money affairs so well as 
to be able to buy a modest estate near Lissy-Gory, and to enter 
into negotiations for redeeming the ancestral property at 
Otradnoé—a project which had long been his cherished dream. 

At first his own steward of necessity, he soon took to the 
pursuit so keenly that it became his favourite, and well-nigh 
his exclusive, occupation. He was a landowner of simple views, 


979 


WAR AND PEACE 


and had no taste for innovations—least of all for the English 
ones which were then coming into fashion, but laughed at all 
theoretical experiments in husbandry, and would have nothing 
to do with machinery, high-priced implements, or sowings of 
expensive crops. In short, he did not confine himself to one 
department of agriculture alone. In his eyes there was the 
one property, with no separate departments to it. He con- 
sidered the main thing in connection with an estate to be, not 
the azote or the oxygen which lay in the soil or in the air, nor 
any special plough or manure, but the chief instrument through 
which the azote or the oxygen or the manure or the plough 
were made to act—namely, the workman or moujik. When 
Nicholas first took up agriculture and entered upon the mysteries 
of its various branches it was the moujik who especially attracted 
his attention, for he looked upon him as more than a mere in- 
strument—as an end also and a judge. At first he watched him 
carefully, in the endeavour to comprehend his needs and his 
opinions as to what was good or bad, and only pretended to 
supervise and give orders while really taking lessons of him in 
different ways of working, in nomenclature, and in opinions 
favourable or unfavourable to given things. It was only when 
Nicholas had thus gained an insight into the tastes and aspira- 
tions of the moujik, had learnt to speak his dialect, to under- 
stand the inner meaning of his sayings, and to feel himself on a 
level with him, that he began to give him orders with confidence 
ie. to fulfil, in his relations with his workmen, the same duty 
which he required of them. And Nicholas’ estate-management 
proved productive of the most brilliant results. 

As soon as he took the estate in hand he unerringly, and as 
though through some gift of prevision, chose his foremen and 
headmen from among the very men who would naturally have 
been chosen by the moujiks themselves, if they had had the 
choice, so that his officials never needed replacing. Before 
engaging in the investigation of the chemical qualities of 
manure or in calculations of “debit and credit” (as he used 
jestingly to call it) he took pains to ascertain the number of stock 
held by his peasants, and did everything he could to increase 
that number. Also, he kept the peasant’s families as large as 
possible, i.e. did not allow them to become divided up, while 
the lazy, the vicious, and the incapable he sought out and 
endeavoured to banish from the community. At seed-times 
and hay and grain harvests he paid equal attention to his 
moujiks' fields and to his own: with the result that few owners 


380 


EPILOGUE 


had fields so well sown and reaped, so richly profitable, as had 
Nicholas. 

His indoor servants he preferred to leave alone, and was 
commonly reported to spoil and pamper them. Whenever he 
had to make any arrangement with regard to them, and especi- 
ally in the matter of punishment, he used to be very undecided 
about it, and only acted after he had consulted the entire house- 
hold. Yet whenever he saw a chance of surrendering an indoor 
servant instead of a moujik to military service he never hesitated 
todoso. Indeed, he was never in doubt concerning his arrange- 
ments with regard to his moujiks. Every order of his, he knew 
well, would meet with the approval of the majority of them, 
even though one or a few should complain. 

Similarly, he never allowed himself to overworkvor punish 
a man just because he felt inclined to do so, nor yet to relieve 
or reward a man just because his personal wish lay that way. 
He himself could not have defined this standard of his of right 
and wrong, yet it was firmly and irrevocably fixed in his mind. 

Often he would speak vexedly of some fault or omission on 
the part of “those Russian fellows of ours,” and really imagine 
for the moment that he could not abide the moujik: yet, as a 
matter of fact, he loved both “those Russian fellows of ours” 
and their ways devotedly, and understood and made his own 
the one method and routine of agriculture which could bring 
him good results. 

Countess Maria was jealous of his love for his moujiks, and 
regretted that she could not share it, since the joys and disap- 
pointments of that (to her) remote and unfamiliar world lay 
beyond her comprehension. She could not understand why it 
should make him so brisk and cheerful to rise at dawn, to spend 
a whole morning in the fields or at the homestead, and to return 
to her at tea-time after a whole day’s sowing, haymaking, or 
reaping. She could not understand his rapture as he proudly 
told her (say) of the rich moujik of the estate, Matvei Ermishin, 
who had been leading grain all night with his family, and had 
got his corn stacked before anyone else had so much as reaped 
their fields. She could not understand why he laughed and 
chuckled so delightedly when he stepped out of the window on 
to the balcony and saw a fine, warm rain falling upon the ripen- 
ing oats, nor why, when a threatening cloud was driving up 
before the wind to moisten the fields of grass and corn, he should 
come in from the homestead with his face red, his body heated 
and perspiring, and his hair smelling of vetch and clover, and 


381 


WAR AND PEACE 


say as he rubbed his hands together joyfully: “Another day 
or two like this, and both my stuff and the moujiks’ will be in 
the barn.” 

Still less could she understand why, for all his kindly heart 
and constant readiness to anticipate her every wish, he should 
grow almost distracted when she repeated to him the request 
of some moujik or old woman who had come to beg her inter- 
cession in obtaining for them leave of absence from work; nor 
why he, the usuaily gentle Nicholas, should so persistenily 
refuse her plea, and angrily request her not to interfere in his 
affairs again. She felt that he had a separate world to which 
he was passionately devoted, and in which laws of its own 
obtained which lay beyond her ken. 

When, also, she sometimes strove to understand him, and to 
praise him for doing good to those under him, he only grew - 
angry, and replied: “Nothing of the sort. Such an idea never 
entered into my head. It is not for their good that I do it. 
That is all poetry and old wives' tales—that sort of talk about 
one's neighbour's good. I wish our children not to have to 
roam about the world, and therefore I wish to set this estate in 
order while I am yet alive. That is all. To do that, a system 
and discipline are necessary. Yes, that is the thing,” he would 
add, clenching his weather-tanned fist, *—though good treat- 
ment also, seeing that if the peasant is poorly fed and clothed 
and only able to afford one horse he will never do good work 
either for me or himself." 

It may be that Nicholas really never allowed himself to think 
that he was doing this work for others or out of pure benevolence, 
but considered it mere work of production. In any case, his 
means increased rapidly, moujiks came from the neighbourhood 
round to request that he would buy them, and for long enough 
after his death the memory of his rule was devoutly cherished 
among the people. “He was a master indeed," they would say. 
“First the moujik’s property, and then his own. Yet he allowed 
no liberties to be taken with him. In a word, he was a master.” 


382 


EPILOGUE 


CHAPTER CXXXVIII 


One thing which occasionally troubled Nicholas in connection 
with his estate-management was his hasty temper, aggravated 
by his old hussar’s habit of giving his hands full rein when 
provoked. At first he saw nothing wrong in this, but during 
the second year of his married life his view of this kind of 
discipline underwent a sudden change. 

One day in the summer a starosta had to be sent for from 
Bogoutcharovo—a man who had succeeded the deceased Dron, 
and now stood accused of various faults and omissions. 
Nicholas went out to the veranda when he arrived, and the 
man had scarcely begun to reply to his master’s questions before 
the sound of shouts and blows was heard. When Nicholas 
returned home at tea-time he, as usual, approached his wife— 
whom he found seated with her head bent over her embroidery 
frame—to tell her about all that had occupied him during the 
day, and, among other things, about the starosta from Bogout- 
charovo. Nevertheless the countess did not stir, but kept 
turning red and pale by turns as she sat there, and pressing her 
lips tightly together. She neither raised her head nor answered 
a word to what her husband was saying. 

“He was such an impudent rascal!” said Nicholas, growing 
angry again at the mere thought of the encounter. “If only 
he had told me that he was drunk at the time and therefore 
saw nothing of it. But what is the matter with you, Maria?” 
he added, suddenly breaking off. 

The countess raised her head, and tried to say something, 
but dropped her eyes again almost instantly, and compressed 
her lips as before. 

“What is it? What is the matter, my dearest?” 

Maria, though not beautiful, always looked most nearly so 
when she was weeping. Yet she never wept out of pain or 
temper—only from grief or pity, and when she did so her 
brilliant eyes took on an altogether inexpressible charm. As 
Nicholas took her by the hand she could contain herself no 
longer, and burst into tears. 

“Nicholas, I saw—he may be guilty, but you—you—why 
should you—? Oh Nicholas!”—and she buried her face in 
her hands. 

Nicholas said nothing, but turned very red, and, moving 
away from her, began to walk up and down the room in silence. 


383 


WAR AND PEACE 


He understood why she was weeping, but instinctively felt that 
he could not agree with her in condemning what he had been 
used to do since a boy. “It is all soft-heartedness on her part 
and old wives’ nonsense," he thought to himself. “Yet can 
she be right after all?" he added presently. Unable to decide 
this last question satisfactorily, he glanced again at her pained, 
compassionate face, and suddenly understood that she was 
indeed right, and felt ashamed of himself. 

“Maria,” he said softly as he approached her, “this shall not 
occur again. I give you my word that it shall not. No, never!" 
he repeated, his voice shaking like a boy's when asking pardon. 

The tears flowed the faster from the countess's eyes, but she 
took his hand and kissed it. 

“When did you break that cameo, Nicholas—to change the 
subject?" she asked him, looking at his hand, which bore a 
ring with a Laocoon's head. 

"This morning. It's all part of the same. Ah, Maria, do 
not remind me of it!" He fired up again. “I pledge you 
my word of honour that it shall never occur a second time, and 
that this shall always help me to remember my word." He 
pointed to the broken ring. 

From that time forth, whenever he was engaged in explana- 
tions with his headman or clerks and the blood flew to his head 
or his fists began to clench themselves, he turned the broken 
ring on his finger, and looked away from the man who was 
angering him. Twice, however, that year he forgot himself, 
and on each occasion he went straight to his wife, confessed 
his fault to her, and repeated his promise that that should be 
the last time. 

"You must despise me," he said to her, *and certainly I 
deserve it.” 

“You should go away, go away, whenever you feel unable 
to restrain yourself,’ she murmured as she strove to console 
him. 

The general society of the district respected Nicholas, but 
scarcely loved him. District interests had no attraction for him, 
and so some people thought him proud, and others stupid. In 
summer he spent all his days, from the time of the spring sow- 
ings to harvest-tide, on the estate, and in the autumn he devoted 
himself to sport with the same enthusiasm as he had done to 
farming—not infrequently going on hunting expeditions which 
lasted a month or more. The winters were spent in going the 
round of the other villages and in reading. As for his reading, 


384 


EPILOGUE 


it consisted mostly of historical works, to the purchase of which 
he devoted an annual fixed sum. In this manner he amassed 
what he called a “serious library," and set himself systematically 
to read the books which he had bought. It was with great 
gravity that he would sit down in his study to perform this 
task—a task which he had begun by setting himself as a duty 
and had gone on to make a regular habit. In fact it gave him 
a peculiar pleasure to think that, in so doing, he was engaging 
in a “serious” pursuit. Except for journeys on business, he 
spent the greater part of the winter at home with his family, 
and shared the small interest of his wife and children. He drew 
ever nearer and nearer to Maria, and discovered every day new 
mental affinities between himself and her. 

Sonia had lived with them since their marriage. Before 
that, however, Nicholas had told his wife—with many self- 
reproaches and much generous praise of Sonia—all that had 
passed between himself and his cousin, and had begged Maria 
always to be kind and good to her. Maria had felt strongly 
that her husband was to blame, and consequently felt ashamed 
in Sonia’s presence, for she thought that Nicholas’ choice must 
have been influenced by Sonia’s poverty. The countess had 
no fault to find with the girl, and tried hard to love her, but she 
simply could not. Indeed, sometimes she found herself cherish- 
ing uncharitable feelings towards her, in spite of her utmost 
efforts to overcome them. 

One day she spoke of Sonia and her own unfairness to her 
friend Natacha. 

“Now, you know,” said Natacha, "you have a good know- 
ledge of the Bible. There is a passage in it which exactly fits 
her.” 

* How so?” inquired Maria in astonishment. 

“To him that hath shall be given, and from him that hath 
not shall be taken away even that which he hath.' Do you 
remember it? She is one ‘that hath not, Why that should 
be so I do not know. Perhaps it is because she has not a 
particle of egoism in her. At all events she has proved to be 
one of those from whom shall be taken away even that which 
they have—for it has been so taken away. Sometimes I feel 
terribly sorry for her. I used to pray that Nicholas would 
marry her eventually, yet I always had a presentiment that he 
would not. She is what I call ‘a wasted flower'—like the 
strawberry flower. Sometimes I feel sorry for her, but at other 
times I think that she does not feel it as we should have done." 


385 


WAR AND PEACE 


Ever after that, in spite of her protests to Natacha that the 
Bible words were not meant to be so interpreted, Maria felt when 
she saw Sonia, that she had no choice but to agree with Natacha’s 
reading of them. True, Sonia hardly seemed to trouble herself 
about her position, and appeared reconciled to her fate as “a 
wasted flower." She seemed to care less for individual members 
of the family than for the family as a whole. Like a cat, it was 
to the household that she attached herself rather than to its 
inmates. She went shopping for the old countess, petted and 
played with the children, and was always ready to perform any 
small service which lay in her power—all of which was accepted 
with a less than adequate measure of gratitude. 

The establishment at Lissy-Gory had now been rebuilt, but 
on different lines to what it had been in the late prince’s time. 
The rebuilding had been begun in days of poverty, so that 
everything was exceedingly plain. The great house, though 
reared on the original foundations of stone, was made only of 
wood, and plastered only on the inside, while the floors were of 
unpainted deal, and the furniture composed of the simplest of 
rough sofas, chairs, arm-chairs, and tables—all of them home- 
made from birch-trees grown on the estate. Nevertheless the 
place was roomy enough, and contained accommodation for 
visitors and their servants as well. Sometimes relatives of the 
Rostows and Bolkonskys would come and stay there for several 
months, and bring with them their families, sixteen horses or so, 
and some dozens of domestics. Likewise, four times a year— 
on the name-days and birthdays of the host and hostess—quite 
a hundred guests would arrive to spend a day or two in the 
house, although for the rest of the year a regular routine of 
occupations was observed, broken only by meals furnished from 
the resources of the estate. 


CHAPTER CXXXIX 


Ir was the eve of the winter festival of St. Nicholas—December 
sth, 1820. That year Natacha, with her husband and children, 
had been staying with her brother since the early autumn. At 
the moment Peter was in St. Petersburg, whither he had gone 
on private business lasting for (so he had said) three weeks, 
but where he was now spending his seventh. Nevertheless 
he was expected back every moment. On that same sth of 
December the Rostows had a guest in the person of an old 


386 


EPILOGUE 


friend of Nicholas'—a retired general named Vassili Fédorovitch 
Denissow. 

On the 6th, the festive day, when many guests were to be 
entertained, Nicholas knew that he would have to take off his 
smock, put on a frockcoat and tight, narrow-toed boots, and 
go to the new church which he had erected; after which he 
would be expected to receive congratulations, to propose toasts, 
and to make a speech about the civil elections and the crops. 
The eve of the festival, however, he considered he might spend 
ashe liked. Before dinner he checked the accounts of the bailiff 
of Riazan—accounts in connection with the property belonging 
to his wife’s nephew, as well as wrote a couple of business letters 
and went round the homestead and horse and cattle stables. 
Next, having taken precautions against the general drunken- 
ness which he knew would ensue on the occasion of the morrow’s 
festival, he returned home to dinner, and sat down to the long 
table (laid for twenty persons and surrounded by the whole staff 
of domestics) without having first exchanged a word with his 
wife. At the table sat his mother, old Madame Bielova (who 
acted as her companion), his wife, his three children, the 
children’s governess, their tutor, his nephew, his nephew’s tutor, 
Sonia, Denissow, Natacha, her three children, their governess, 
and old Michael Ivanovitch (formerly architect to the prince, and 
now living in retirement at Lissy-Gory.) 

Countess Maria was seated at the opposite end of the table to 
Nicholas, but her husband had no sooner sat down in his place 
than she divined, from the gesture with which he unfolded his 
napkin and abruptly swept aside the tumbler and wine glass 
which stood before him, that he was out of humour. This not 
infrequently happened with him, especially before he had had 
his soup, and when he had come straight in to dinner from the 
estate. Maria knew this mood of his very well, and when she 
was herself in a cheerful one, she would wait quietly until he 
had finished his soup, and then begin to talk to him and to make 
him confess that he had had no reason to be angry. To-day, 
however, she quite forgot this precaution of hers, for it hurt 
her and depressed her to think of his gratuitous ill-temper with 
her. First of all she asked him where he had been, and he told 
her. Then she asked him whether everything was going on 
well on the estate, and at this he frowned discouragingly, as 
though irritated at her unnatural tone, and returned a curt 
answer. 

“So I was not mistaken,” thought the countess to herself. 


387 


WAR AND PEACE 


“Yet what can he be angry with me for?” The tone in which 
he had answered her had told her of ill-will towards herself and a 
desire to cut short the conversation. She knew that her words 
had been forced and unnatural, yet she had felt herself unable 
to refrain from asking the questions she did. 

However, the conversation at dinner—thanks to Denissow— 
soon became general and animated, so that Maria said no more 
to her husband just then, but when everyone had left the table 
and gathered round the old countess to pay her their respects, 
Maria bent over her husband, kissed him, and asked him the 
reason of his ill-temper with her. 

“You are always taking strange notions into your head,” he 
replied. “I was not so much as dreaming of being angry with 
you." Yet the first word always! practically said to her, 
“Yes, I am angry, but I do not mean to tell you the reason 
why." 

Nicholas lived on such good terms with his wife that even 
Sonia and the old countess—both of whom, from instincts of 
jealousy, wished to see a difference arise between the pair— 
could never find excuse for reproaching him. Yet they had 
their moments of hostility, so that at times, and particularly 
after a more than usually happy period, a feeling of estrange- 
ment and enmity would come over them both. This feeling 
manifested itself most frequently when the countess was 
enceinte, and the present was such a time. 

“Well, messieurs et mesdames,” went on Nicholas loudly and 
in a tone of assumed gaiety (it seemed to Maria that he spoke 
thus on purpose to offend her), *I have been on my legs since 
six o'clock. To-morrow we shall all of us have to work, but 
to-day let us rest," and, without another word to the countess, 
he went into the small drawing-room, and threw himself down 
upon a sofa. 

“That is always the way," thought the countess. “He will 
speak to everyone but myself. I can see—yes, I can see it 
clearly—that I am repugnant to him whenever I am in this 
condition." She glanced at her figure, and then went to a 
mirror to look at her sallow, drawn face, with its eyes showing 
larger than ever. Everything now seemed distasteful to her— 
both the chattering, and Denissow's laughter, and Natacha's 
voice, and (above all) the look which Sonia swiftly threw her 
at that moment. Sonia, indeed, was always the first pretext 
selected by the countess for being vexed about anything. 


1 In the Russian this word comes first in the sentence. 


388 


EPILOGUE 


After sitting a while with her guests and not understanding a 
word of what they were saying, she quietly left the room, and 
went to the nursery. The children were riding to Moscow on 
chairs, and invited her to accompany them. She sat down and 
played with them for a time, but the thought of her husband 
and his unreasonable anger troubled her continually. She 
rose, and walked cautiously on tip-toe towards the small 
drawing-room. 

* Perhaps he is not asleep, and I might have an explanation 
with him," she said to herself. Andrusha, ber eldest boy, was 
walking behind her on tip-toe, in imitation of her movements, 
but she never noticed him. 

* Chére Marie, il dort, je crois; il est si fatigué," said Sonia, 
who met her at that moment in the large drawing-room (indeed, 
to the countess she seemed to meet her everywhere). “Take 
care that Andrusha does not wake him." 

Upon this Maria looked round, and, seeing Andrusha behind 
her, felt that Sonia was right. That alone was enough to make 
her angry, and she only just restrained herself from returning 
a sharp answer. She said nothing, however, but, to show her 
independence of Sonia, signed to Andrusha to keep quiet 
(though he still kept following her), and approached the door 
of the small drawing-room, while Sonia moved away to the 
door of the larger one. From the room in which Nicholas was 
sleeping there came the sound of the regular breathing which 
Maria knew so well in all its tones. As she listened to that 
breathing she seemed to see the smooth, handsome forehead and 
temples—the whole face—upon which she had so often gazed 
as he lay sleeping in the silent watches of the night. Suddenly 
Nicholas made a movement, and snored, whereupon Andrusha 
cried out from behind the door: “ Papa dear, mamma is standing 
here.” For a moment the countess turned pale with terror as 
she beckoned to the little boy to hold his tongue. He obeyed 
her, and for a moment or two there ensued what seemed to 
Maria a dreadful silence, for she knew how greatly Nicholas 
disliked to be aroused. All at once another snore came from 
within, then a movement, and at last Nicholas’ reluctant voice 
said: 

“They will not let me have a moment's peace. Is that you, 
Maria? Why have you brought him here?" 

“T only came to look for you, as I did not see you anywhere 
about. Please excuse me." 

Nicholas burst into a fit of coughing, and returned no reply. 


389 


WAR AND PEACE 


Maria moved away from the door, and conducted her little boy 
back to the nursery. Five minutes later the little black-eyed, 
three-year-old Natacha, her father’s pet, had learnt from her 
brother that papa was asleep and mamma in the drawing-room, 
and so had scampered off to her father without her mother’s 
knowledge. The black-eyed youngster pushed boldly at the 
door, ran to the sofa with a loud pattering of her tiny feet, and, 
having taken stock of her father’s attitude as he lay sleeping 
with his back towards her, raised herself on tip-toe, and kissed 
the hand upon which his head was resting. Nicholas turned 
round with a kindly smile on his face. 

“Natacha, Natacha!” came the mother’s frightened whisper 
from outside the door. “Papa wishes to go to sleep.” 

“No, he doesn’t, mamma,” answered the little girl in a tone 
of conviction. “He is smiling.” 

Nicholas put his legs to the floor, sat up, and took his little 
daughter up in his arms. 

* Come in, Maria," he said to his wife. The countess entered 
the room, and seated herself beside her husband. 

"I had not seen that Andrusha was following me," she said 
timidly. “TI am so sorry." 

Nicholas, holding the little girl by one arm, glanced at his 
wife, and, seeing the contrite look on her face, put his other arm 
round her, and kissed her hair. 

“May I kiss mamma?” he asked the tiny Natacha. 

Natacha laughed shyly. “Yes, yes—again," she said with 
a commanding gesture as she pointed to the spot where Nicholas 
had kissed his wife before. 

"I cannot imagine why you should have thought that I 
Was cross," he said, answering the question which he knew was 
in Maria's mind. 

“Ah, but you cannot think how unhappy and lonely I am 
when you behave like that. To me it always seems that—" 

"Never mind, Maria. It was all my folly. How you do 
worry yourself!" he said cheerfully. 

“T am always thinking that you do not love me—that I am 
ugly. and that I shall always be so. And now—when—when 
I am like this—" 

“How absurd you are! ‘Handsome is that handsome does,’ 
you know—not the other way about. Only a Malvina or 
women of that kind are loved for their beauty alone. Do I 
love my wife? Well, I do not so much love her as—how can 
I express it? Without you, and when there is this sort of 


390 


EPILOGUE 


misunderstanding between us, I should feel lost and able to 
do nothing. Do I love my own finger? No, but if it were 
cut off—” 

“Oh, but I am not quite the same thing. Yet I understand 
you all the same. You are not angry with me, then?” 

“Yes, terribly angry,” he said with a smile as he rose and, 
smoothing his dishevelled hair, began to walk up and down the 
room. 

“Do you know, Maria, what I am thinking about?” he began, 
at once resuming his habit of expressing his thoughts aloud, 
now that he was reconciled to his wife again. He never thought 
of asking her whether she wished to hear his thoughts or not. 
That he took for granted. An idea had occurred to him, and 
of course it had occurred to her also. Accordingly he told her of 
his scheme of inviting Peter to stay with them until the spring. 

The countess listened to him, made a few remarks, and then 
began, in her turn, to utter her thoughts aloud. They were all 
of them about the children. 

“What a little woman it is!” she said in French as she 
pointed to the diminutive Natacha. “You accuse us women 
of being illogical. Well, there she sits—our logic. I told her 
just now that papa wanted to go to sleep, but she replied, ‘No, 
he is smiling’—and she was right too.” Maria laughed 
happily. 

“Ves, yes,” said Nicholas, lifting his little daughter up in his 
strong arms, and setting her upon his shoulders. Steadying 
the tiny legs with his hand, he began to walk up and down 
the room with her. The faces both of father and daughter 
looked almost foolishly happy. 

“But, you know, you can be unfair sometimes. You love 
this one too much, for instance,” Maria whispered to him in 
French. 

“Ves but what am I todo? I try my best not to show it." 

At this moment there sounded through the hall and passage 
the noise of hoof-beats as a carriage-drag was let down. 

“Someone has just arrived.” 

“I expect it is Peter; I will go and see,” said Maria as she 
left the room. 

In her absence Nicholas took the opportunity of giving his 
little daughter a gallop round the room. At last, out of breath, 
he dethroned the laughing mite from her perch, and pressed 
her to his heart. His prancings round the room had reminded 
him of dancing, and as he looked at the round, happy, childish 


391 


WAR AND PEACE 


face, he wondered what she would be like when he, an old man, 
led her out to dance the mazurka with her as his dead father 
had been used to dance the “ Daniel Cooper” with his daughter. 

“Yes, it is he, Nicholas,” said Maria presently, as she returned. 
“Dear Natacha is in raptures. You should have seen her 
delight, as well as heard Peter catching it for having overstayed 
his time. Well, let us go now. As for you,” she added with a 
glance and smile to the little girl clinging to her father, “ you will 
have to part from us now.” 

Nicholas departed, hand in hand with his daughter, and the 
countess found herself alone a minute in the room. 

“Never, never would I have believed that I could be so 
happy,” she whispered to herself. Her face broke into a smile, 
yet on the instant a sigh came also, and gentle longing showed 
itself in the depths of her eyes. It was as though, over and 
above the happiness which she was now experiencing, there 
existed another kind of happiness, unattainable in this life, of 
which she had just been involuntarily reminded. 


CHAPTER CXL 


NATACBA had been married in the early spring of 1813, and by 
1820 was in possession of three girls and a boy. To havea boy 
had always been her dearest wish, and she suckled him herself. 
She had filled out and become stouter, so that it was difficult to 
distinguish in the buxom mother the former slender, active 
Natacha. The lines of her face were firmer, and always wore an 
expression of quiet cheerfulness and good nature. Indeed, her 
face contained none of the constant fire and animation which had 
formerly constituted its greatest charm, but, on the contrary, 
often looked one with her body, and evinced no sign of a soul 
behind it. In short, she resembled a fine, vigorous, productive 
hen. Yet there were certain rare occasions when the old fire 
flamed up in her again. Those occasions were when—as now— 
her husband had returned from a journey, or when one of her 
children was recovering from an illness, or when she and Maria 
were recalling reminiscences of Prince Andrew (she supposed 
her husband to be jealous of the prince’s memory, and so never 
mentioned the latter in Peter’s presence), or (most rarely of all) 
when some unusual occasion induced her to sing—an accom- 
plishment which she had altogether dropped since her marriage. 


392 


EPILOGUE 


At such times the revival of the old fire in her ample, but comely, 
form made her look more attractive than ever. 

Since their marriage she and her husband had lived succes- 
sively in Moscow, in St. Petersburg, at a village near Moscow, 
and at her mother's, i.e. at Nicholas's. Society saw little of the 
young Countess Bésoukhow, and those who did see her found her 
unsatisfactory, since she was neither sociable nor ingratiating. 
It was not that she liked isolation (though, as a matter of fact, 
she hardly knew whether she liked it or not—on the whole she 
thought not) so much as that the duties of bearing, rearing, and 
feeding children and participating in every moment of her 
husband's life could not be satisfactorily fulfilled except by 
renouncing the world. All who had known her before her 
marriage were astonished at the change which it had wrought in 
her, as though it were something extraordinary. Only the old 
countess, whose maternal instinct had always told her that 
Natacha’s waywardness proceeded solely from the need of a 
family and a husband (as, indeed, Natacha herself had once 
avowed, less in jest than in earnest, at Otradnoé), was surprised 
that these people who had never understood her daughter should 
fcel astonishment at the change, and often repeated that she 
had always known that Natacha would prove an exemplary 
wife and mother. “Only,” the old countess would add, “she 
carries her love for her husband and children to extreme 
limits, so that it almost seems silly.” 

Natacha did not follow the golden rule prescribed by sensible 
people, and especially by the French, that a womar who gets 
married ought not to neglect herself afterwards and throw 
away her talents, but rather that she ought to pay more attention 
to her appearance even than she had done in girlhood, and so to 
captivate her husband even more than had been the case when 
he was a bachelor. Natacha, on the contrary, at once laid 
aside all her charms, one of the greatest of which had been her 
singing. Indeed, she laid it aside for that very reason—that it 
was so great a charm. Nor did she pay any further heed to her 
manners, nor to her refinement of speech, nor to the art of 
showing herself to her husband in attractive poses, nor to her 
toilet, nor to the rule of never demanding anything of her 
husband. In fact, she contravened every one of these rules. 
She felt that the charms which her instinct had formerly taught 
her to use would now look ridiculous in her husband’s eyes, 
since he was the man to whom she had given her whole heart 
from the very first, and left no corner of it hidden from his 


393 


WAR AND PEACE 


sight. She felt that the bond between her and her husband 
rested, not on the poetical sentiments which had attracted him 
to her at first, but on sentiments as indefinite—though also as 
strong— as the bond which bound her body to her soul. 

To arrange her hair en coiffure, to wear corsets, and to sing 
ballads just in order to attract her husband would have seemed 
to her as strange as to deck herself out to please only herself. 
To adorn her person to please others might have been agreeable 
to her—she did not quite know whether it would or not—but at 
all events there was no time for it. In fact the chief reason 
why she never paid any attention to her singing or dress or 
choice of words was that she never had time to do so. 

We all know that a human being may become entirely 
absorbed in one subject, however trifling it be. We all know, 
too, that no subject is so trifling as to be incapable of boundless 
development when the whole attention of a human being is con- 
centrated upon it. The subject which absorbed all Natacha’s 
faculties was her family, i.e. her husband (whom she meant to 
hold so tightly as always to remain her undivided property), 
her house, and her children (who, of course, had to be born, 
reared, fed, and educated). The further she penetrated—not 
only with her intellect, but with her whole soul and being— 
into the subject which absorbed her, the more did that subject 
develop under her cultivation, and the weaker and more insigni- 
ficant did her powers to cope with it appear to her: with the 
result that, though she concertrated the whole of them upon 
that one thing, she never succeeded in doing all that she thought 
she ought to accomplish. 

Likewise, although discussions and opinions on the rights of 
women and on the relations, freedom, and rights of married 
couples were not then called “questions” as they are now, they 
existed just the same. Yet Natacha not only took no interest 
in such questions, but simply did not understand them. Then, 
as now, those questions existed only for persons who see in 
marriage nothing beyond the pleasure which husband and wife 
may derive from one another—who see only the basis of marriage 
and not the whole significance of the family. These questions 
and opinions of to-day—the questions, for instance, of how to get 
the most satisfaction out of one’s dinner—did not then exist, 
and do not now, for persons of whom the aim of dinner is 
sustenance, and of cohabitation a family. If the aim of dinner 
is the nourishment of the body, then the human being who 
suddenly begins to eat two dinners attains, it may be, great 


394 


/ 


EPILOGUE 


satisfaction, but not his or her aim, seeing that two dinners are 
indigestible to the stomach. If, also, the aim of marriage is a 
family, then he or she who seeks to have a number of wives or 
husbands attains, it may be, great satisfaction, but can never 
in any case possess a family. If the aim of dinner is sustenance, 
and that of marriage a family, the whole question is decided by 
merely eating no more than the stomach can digest or by having 
no more wives or husbands than is necessary for the production 
of a family, ie. one wife or one husband only. Natacha had 
needed a husband, and a husband had been given her, and he, 
in his turn, had given her a family. For any other husband— 
even for a better one—she saw no necessity, but, inasmuch as 
all her mental faculties were bent upon the service of that 
husband, and her family, she could not imagine, nor see any 
interest in imagining, what things might have been like if they 
had been otherwise. 

She had no love for society in general, and for that very reason 
she loved the society of her relatives—of the Countess Maria, 
her brother, her mother, and Sonia—the more. She liked the 
society of people upon whom she could emerge with great strides 
from the nursery—clad only in a dishevelled dressing-gown, 
and her face beaming—for the purpose of showing them a diaper 
stained yellow instead of green, and hearing their congratula- 
tions that the child was so much better. In fact, she became 
so careless of herself that her dresses, her coiffure, her rough and 
ready expressions, her jealousy (she was jealous of Sonia, of the 
governess, of every woman, pretty or the reverse) grew to be 
stock jests among her kinsfolk. The general opinion was that 
Peter was completely under her thumb, and in very truth it 
was the case. From the earliest days of their married life 
Natacha had made her demands upon him plain, and though 
Peter had been much surprised at this entirely new view adopted 
by his wife—the view that every moment of his life should belong 
to her and the family—he had benefited from her insistence, 
and yielded to it. 

The subordination of Peter lay in the circumstance that he 
dare not speak smilingly to another woman, never to go toa 
club for dinner merely in order to pass the time, never to spend 
money on whims, and never to go away for long visits except on 
business affairs (among which his wife included his scientific 
pursuits—matters of which she knew nothing, but to which she 
attached the greatest importance). In return, Peter had full 
licence, when at home, to manage himself and his family as he 


995 


WAR AND PEACE 


pleased. There Natacha assumed the position of her husband’s 
slave, and the whole household walked on tip-toe when Peter 
was engaged in reading or writing in his study. He had only to 
express a command for it to be obeyed—a wish, and Natacha 
leapt to fulfil it. 

The entire household was ruled by what figured as the orders 
of the husband, i.e. by Peter’s wishes, which Natacha endeav- 
oured always to anticipate. How and where they should 
live, whom they should know, Natacha’s ties and pursuits, the 
education of the children—not only were all these things ordained 
according to Peter’s expressed will, but his wife likewise en- 
deavoured to draw deductions from any ideas which he expressed 
in conversation. As a matter of fact, she always guessed cor- 
rectly the substance of his wishes, and, that done, she held him 
firmly to what he had chosen. If he tried to change his mind - 
she used his original choice as a weapon for effecting his reduction. 
Thus, during the tedious and (to Peter) always memorable time 
which followed upon the birth of their first delicate baby, and 
when, through being obliged to change its wet nurse three times 
in succession, Natacha fell ill with worry, Peter one day told 
her of Rousseau’s ideas (with which he was in entire agreement) 
on the subject of the unnatural and deleterious effects of having 
wet nurses at all. Accordingly, when the next baby arrived, she 
resisted both her mother, the doctors, and her husband himself 
when they urged her not to suckle the child herself (as though 
it were a thing altogether unheard of and harmful !) but insisted 
thenceforth in bringing up all her children at her own breast. 

It often happened, too, that, in moments of friction, the 
husband and wife would quarrel, but, if so, it always happened 
that, long after the actual dispute, Peter would suddenly be 
surprised and pleased to find his wife expressing, both in theory 
and practice, the very idea about which they had quarrelled— 
and not the idea alone, but the idea purged of any personal 
element which Peter had imported into it during the heat of 
dispute. Thus, after seven years of married life, Peter was able 
to feel a comforting, assured conviction that he was not a bad 
fellow after all. This he could do because he saw himself 
reflected in his wife. In himself he could feel the good and the 
bad mingling with and infecting one another, but in her he saw 
reflected only what was good in him, since everything else she 
rejected. This power of reflection in her was due to no logical 
scheme, but constituted a power of quite another—a secret and 
independent—kind. 


396 


EPILOGUE 


CHAPTER CXLI 


Two months ago, i.e. since they had come to stay with the 
Rostows—Peter had received a letter from Prince Theodore, 
summoning him to St. Petersburg, for the decision of some 
important questions which were then occupying the minds of 
the members of an association of which Peter was one of the 
principal founders. As soon as she had read the letter (she read 
all her husband’s letters) Natacha voluntarily advised Peter to 
go to St. Petersburg, in spite of her knowledge that she would 
miss him greatly in his absence. To all that constituted the 
intellectual, the abstract, work of her husband she attributed 
(since she did not understand it) an immense importance, and 
was constantly afraid of being a hindrance to its progress. To 
Peter’s diffident, questioning glance after she had read the letter 
she replied that he might go so long as he kept strictly to the 
date of his return, and in the end he obtained four weeks’ leave 
of absence. 

The term of that leave had expired a fortnight ago, and 
Natacha had since been in a constant state of nervousness, grief, 
and anger. Denissow, the discontented retired general who had 
been staying with the Rostows throughout those two weeks, had 
gazed at her with pained surprise, as at a bad portrait of some 
one whom he knew well. Her despondent, uninterested air, 
her awkward answers, and her talk about her children were all 
that he saw and heard in an old flame of his. Natacha had 
been depressed and irritable during the whole of the two 
weeks, but never more so than when Sonia or Maria had sought 
to comfort her by making excuses for Peter or by inventing 
reasons for his delay. 

“That is all mere folly and rubbish,” Natacha had answered. 
«The mischief comes of those intellectual ideas of his, which 
lead to nothing, and of those idiotic associations of his." This, 
too, concerning the very pursuits to which she had hitherto 
attached such immense importance! Then she had departed 
to the nursery to feed her one little boy, Pétia. Nobody in the 
world could have said anything so wise, so reassuring, to her 
as did this little three-months-old being when he was laid at 
her breast and she could feel the movements of his lips and the 
nuzzling of his tiny nose. That little being said to her: “You 
may be angry, you may be jealous, you may be wishing to 
revenge yourself upon him, you may be feeling frightened on his 


397 


WAR AND PEACE 


account, but he is here in me, he is here in me!” To this no 
answer could be returned, for it was more than true. 

So often did Natacha have recourse to her baby during those 
two weeks of anxiety, and so much time did she spend over him, 
that she overfed him, and he fell ill. She was horror-struck at 
this, although it was just what she needed, for, so long as she was 
looking after him, she found it easier to bear the anxiety about 
her husband. The evening that Peter’s cab sounded at the 
door she had just fed the baby, when the nurse, who knew how 
much it would please her mistress, ran softly, but swiftly, and 
with a beaming face, into the room. 

"Has he come, then?" asked Natacha in a hasty whisper, 
but fearing to stir lest she should waken the sleeping infant. 

“Yes, ma’am,” was the nurse’s whisper in answer. 

The blood flew to Natacha’s face, and her feet made an 
involuntary movement under her, but to get up and run to the 
portico was impossible at that moment. Just then the child 
opened its eyes and looked at her. “So there you are," it 
seemed to say, and then lazily smacked its lips again. Gently 
withdrawing her breast, Natacha rocked him a moment and 
then handed him to the nurse. The next minute she was 
speeding towards the door. Yet she had no sooner reached it 
than she stopped (as though she felt her conscience pricking her 
for letting her delight take her away from baby so soon) and 
looked round. The nurse, her elbows stuck out, was just lifting 
him over the rails of his cot. 

“Yes, go, go, ma’am! Do not be disturbed about him,” 
whispered the nurse with a smile and with the familiarity which 
soon arises between nurse and mistress, and Natacha fled on 
light feet towards the portico. Denissow, who was just issuing, 
pipe in hand, from the study into the hall, saw her for the 
first time in a new guise. A clear, brilliant, joyous light was 
streaming in abundance from her transfigured face. 

" He has arrived!” she exclaimed as she sped past him, and 
Denissow somehow felt that he too was pleased that Peter had 
returned, little though he liked him. Running into the portico, 
Natacha saw there a tall figure clad in a fur coat, and unwinding 
a scarf. 

“Yes, yes, it is he!" she said to herself as, flying to him, she 
embraced him, pressed her head to his bosom, and then, drawing 
a little away from him again, gazed into his red, frost-coated, 
delighted face. “Yes, it is he!” she exclaimed again. “I am 
happy now, and contented and——” 


398 


EPILOGUE 


But suddenly she remembered all the pangs of waiting which 
she had to go through during the last two weeks, and the 
joy which was beaming from her face suddenly vanished. She 
frowned, and a flood of reproaches and bitter words began to 
descend upon Peter. 

“Yes, it is all very well for you to look comfortable and merry, 
for you have been enjoying yourself; but what about me? Alot 
you cared about the children! Here have I been feeding them 
until my milk ran dry! Pétia has been at death's door, while 
you have been enjoying yourself! Yes, it was all very well for 
youl” 

Peter knew that he was innocent in the matter, since he could 
not possibly have returned any sooner. He also knew that, 
ugly though this outburst looked, it would pass away in a 
moment or two. Above all, he knew that he himself was in 
excellent temper and spirits. He would have liked to have 
burst out laughing, but had not the hardihood to do so, sc he 
pulled a pitiful, frightened face, and cringed humbly before his 
wife. 

«I swear to God I could not come home sooner. But what 
has been the matter with Pétia?” 

«Never mind. Come in now. You would be sorry if you 
knew what a state I have been in without you, and how I have 
been worrying myself." 

“Then you are quite well?” 

“Never mind. Let us go in,” she replied, without letting 
go of his hands, and the pair departed to their rooms. 

When Nicholas and his wife came to look for Peter, he was in 
the nursery, holding his little son in the huge palm of his right 
hand, and dandling him up and down. On his broad face, with 
its enormous toothless mouth, was a fixed and happy smile. The 
storm had long ago dispersed, and the sun was shining clearly 
and jovously from Natacha’s face as she looked approvingly at 
her husband and child. 

* And did you manage to say all that you wanted to Prince 
Theodore?” she was asking him. 

* Yes, certainly.” 

“Oh, look how he is holding it!” (by “it” Natacha meant 
the baby’s head). “How he frightened me! And did you see 
the princess? Is it true that she is in love with that . . .” 

“Ves, just think of it!” 

At that moment Nicholas and Maria entered the room. 
Peter went to greet them, his son still resting in his arms; but, 


599 


WAR AND PEACE 


although he duly answered his visitors’ questions, it was clear 
that, despite the interesting news he had to tell them, the baby 
with the cap on its nodding head was absorbing the greater 
part of his attention. 

“What a dear!” exclaimed Maria as she looked at the little 
one and began playing with it. “I cannot think”—here she 
turned to her husband—" how you fail to see the beauty of such 
a bundle of charms as this.” 

“Well, I cannot see it,” said Nicholas, looking coldly at the 
baby. “Just a lump of flesh, that is all. Come, Peter.” 

“He is the kindest father in the world, really,” said Maria in 
justification of her husband; “though only when they have 
become a year or two older.” 

“Peter nurses our babies splendidly,” said Natacha. “He 
says that the palm of his hand is just made for a baby’s back. 
See him.” 

“Yes—better than for this," remarked Peter with a smile as 
he took hold of the child and handed it to the nurse. 


CHAPTER CXLII 


As always happens in a real family, the household at Lissy- 
Gory contained several entirely different communes which, 
while preserving each of them their individuality, made conces- 
sions to the rest, and thus combined to form a single harmonious 
whole. Each event which occurred in the house brought equal 
joy or sorrow, was of equal importance or the reverse, to all 
those communes, while at the same time each separate com- 
mune had its own reasons for rejoicing or sorrowing over a 
given event. Thus Peter’s return was an important and joyful 
occasion, and was expressed as such by everyone. The servants 
—the truest judges of their employers, since they judge, not by 
what they hear them say nor by any expression of sentiments, 
but by deeds and modes of life—were glad that Peter had 
returned, for the reason that they knew that, so long as he was 
at home, the count would cease his daily round of the estate, 
and be in a better and kinder mood. Likewise there would be 
handsome presents for them all at festival time. The children 
and their governesses rejoiced at Peter’s return because no one 


! The author means the old-time patriarchal family of grandparents, with 
all their married or unmarried descendants, 


400 


EPILOGUE 


extended to them a share of the common life so much as he did. 
He alone could play that one piece of his on the clavichord— 
the piece which, as he himself said, would do for every sort of 
SECs his coming represented rich presents for them as 
well. 

Little Nicolenka, who was now a slim youngster of fifteen, 
with curly flaxen hair and beautiful eyes, as well as of a delicate 
and highly-strung temperament, rejoiced at Peter’s return for 
the reason that “Uncle” Peter, as he called him, was the object 
of his passionate adoration and affection. No one had inspired 
this immense affection in Nicolenka, and, as a matter of fact, 
he very seldom saw Peter. His guardian, the Countess Maria, 
tried by every means to induce the boy to love her husband as 
she did herself, but, though Nicolenka liked him, his liking had 
in it just a shade of contempt. Peter, however, he simply 
worshipped. He had no desire to be a hussar or a knight of 
St. George as his Uncle Nicholas had been. What he wanted to 
become was a learned, clever, good-natured savant like Peter. 
In Peter’s presence his face never ceased to beam, and when the 
great man spoke to him the boy would blush and sigh. Nota 
word of what Peter was saying would he miss, and afterwards 
he would recall and puzzle over—either with Dessalles or alone 
—each separate word that his idol had uttered. Peter’s past 
life; his misfortunes up to 1812—misfortunes of which Nico- 
lenka had succeeded, through fragments overheard, in forming 
for himself a dim, legendary picture; his adventures in Moscow; 
his imprisonment; Plato Karataiew (of whom the boy had 
heard from Peter himself) ; his love for Natacha (whom Nicolenka 
also loved devotedly); and, above all, his friendship for his 
(Nicolenka’s) father, whom the boy could not remember —all 
this elevated Peter, in his eyes, to the position of a saint and 
hero. From stray references to his father and Natacha, from 
the emotion with which Peter spoke of the dead man, and from 
the subdued, reverent way in which Natacha also mentioned 
his name, the boy, who was just beginning to guess at love, 
conceived the idea that his father had once been in love with 
Natacha, and had committed her, at his death, to his friend’s 
care. That father, of whom the boy had no recollection, 
appeared to him a divinity incapable even of being imagined, 
as well as a being of whom he never thought but with a softening 
of the heart and tears of mingled joy and longing. Thus 
Nicolenka was pleased when Peter returned. 

The guests, for their part, welcomed Peter as a man who 


401 


WAR AND PEACE 


could enliven and knit together any society that he was in. The 
grown-up members of the family were glad of a friend under 
whom life went easier and quieter, while the elder ones were 
pleased with the expectation of presents, and mainly with the 
fact that Natacha had now recovered her spirits. 

Peter, of course, was conscious of these different views taken 
of himself by the various communes, and hastened to give each 
of the latter what it expected. He was the most unbusinesslike 
and forgetful of men, but with the help of a list drawn up for 
him by his wife he had managed to buy everything that was 
needed, including her mother’s and brother’s commissions, a 
dress for Madame Bielova, and toys for his nephews. In the 
early days of his married life this requirement of his wife’s— 
that he should remember and purchase every single article 
which he had undertaken to buy—-had seemed to him a strange 
thing, and he had been greatly impressed by her serious dis- 
pleasure when, on his first return from an expedition, she found 
that he had forgotten everything. In time, however, he got 
used to it. Knowing how careful Natacha was never to entrust 
him with a commission for herself, as well as to entrust him 
with commissions for others only when she herself was not 
going with him, he had taken a special boyish pleasure—a 
pleasure which surprised even himself—in buying these various 
gifts for the entire household and forgetting nobody. If he 
deserved any blame from Natacha it was because he had bought 
and spent too much. To her many failings, as most people 
thought them, or her virtues, as Peter considered them to be, 
Natacha certainly added that of thriftiness. From the time 
when he had begun to live in a large house and have a family 
entailing large expenses he had been surprised to find that he 
spent only half of what he had done before, and that his lately 
disorganised finances—disorganised chiefly by his first wife's 
debts—had begun to fall into order. Life was cheaper for him 
because his life was now restricted. The most expensive 
luxury in life—namely, the sort of life which is liable to 
be changed from day to day—he no longer possessed, nor 
did he wish to possess it again. He felt that his order of 
existence was now settled once and for all till death—that to 
change it was not in his power, and that that order was an 
inexpensive one. 

It was with a cheerful, smiling countenance that he now 
spread out his presents. “Look at it!” he cried as, in shop- 
man's fashion, he turned over a width of material. Natacha, 


402 


EPILOGUE 


who was holding her eldest girl on her knees, turned her beaming 
eyes from her husband to what he was showing her. 

“Is that for Madame Bielova?" she asked as she fingered 
the stuff to try its goodness. “It must have cost several 
roubles, did it not?” 

He told her the price. 

“Too dear," commented Natacha. “However, how pleased 
mamma and the children will be! Only, it was no good your 
buying that thing for me," she added, unable to repress a smile 
as she gazed admiringly at a comb set with pearls—a kind of 
ornament which was just then coming into fashion. 

“They confused me so at Adéle's. One buys and buys, you 
know," he said. 

* When should I ever want to put it on? "—Aand she laid the 
thing aside. "Still, we will keep it for little Masha. Perhaps 
they will be wearing them again in her day. Now let us go." 

Collecting the presents together, they proceeded to the 
nursery, first of all, and then to see the old countess. She 
was sitting in her usual place with Madame Bielova, playing 
patience, when Peter and Natacha entered the drawing-room— 
their arms piled to their noses with parcels. 

The old countess—now over sixty—had grey hair and a cap 
framing her wrinkled face with a frill, while her upper lip had 
fallen in and her eyes were dim. Since the deaths of her 
husband and son, following so closely upon one another, she 
had felt very much lost in the world, like a being devoid of all 
purpose or meaning. True, she ate, drank, slept, and con- 
versed, but she did not really live. Life brought her no impres- 
sions, nor did she ask anything of life. All that she asked for 
was peace—and peace she would find only in death itself. 
Nevertheless, so long as death did not come to her, she had to 
exist, to exert her powers of life. She evinced to a remarkable 
degree the traits to be found only in very young children and 
very old people. No outward aim was discernible in her life, 
but merely the necessity of exercising her various faculties and 
instincts. She needed to eat a little, to sleep a little, to think 
a little, to talk a little, to weep a little, to work a little, to lose 
her temper a little—but only because she possessed a brain, 
a stomach, muscles, nerves and a liver. All this she did as 
though moved to it by nothing external and doing it in a fashion 
altogether different to that of persons hale and hearty who 


see an end beyond the immediate one for which they are striving. 


She spoke only because it was a physical necessity to her 


403 


WAR AND PEACE 


to use her tongue a little; she wept as a child weeps, ie., 
because it is physically necessary for it to use its lachrymal 
glands; and so on. What, in people possessed of their full 
health and strength, would seem purpose was, in her, merely 
pretext. 

Thus, in the morning—especially if she had eaten anything 
very rich overnight —she was apt to feel the need of being 
cross, and so selected the merest pretext for being so—namely, 
the deafness of Madame Bielova. She would begin by saying 
something to her, almost in a whisper, from the other end of 
the room—such as, “I think it is a little warmer to-day, my 
dear," and then, when Madame Bielova answered at random, 
"What? Has he returned?" or something like that, the 
countess would exclaim angrily: “My God! How stupid and 
deaf the woman is!” i 

Another of her pretexts was her snuff, which, on such 
occasions, always seemed to her either too dry or too damp 
or badly ground. Before fits of temper of this sort her face 
would assume a bilious tinge, so that her servants had learnt 
to know unerringly when Madame Bielova would next be deaf 
or the snuff too dry. Just as she needed to work off her spleen 
in this way, so she sometimes needed to exercise another of her 
faculties—namely, the one of thinking, and for this she took 
as her pretext the game of patience. Again, when she felt 
inclined to be lachrymose, her excuse was the late count. When 
she felt desirous of being nervous, she had resort to Nicholas 
and his health. When she wanted to speak venomously, she 
selected as her butt the Countess Maria. When she felt the 
need of sheer exercise for her tongue (which generally happened 
about seven o’clock after her post-prandial sleep in a darkened 
room), she accomplished her object by telling, over and over 
again, the same stories to the same auditors. 

This condition of the old lady’s was well-known to the whole 
household, but no one ever spoke of it. On the contrary, every- 
one endeavoured by every means to satisfy her demands. 
Only the exchange of an occasional half-smile between Nicholas, 
Peter, Natacha, and the Countess Maria expressed this mutual 
comprehension of her position. Yet those glances said more 
than that. They said that she had sustained her part well in 
life; that she was not wholly composed of what she now 
appeared to be; that all would some day be as she was already ; 
and that it was a pleasure to give way to her, to exercise 
forbearance towards a personage who once was as valuable and 


404 


EPILOGUE 


as full of life as the rest of them, but who now was fallen into 
decay. Memento mori—that is what those glances said. 

Only the few stupid or unkind members of the household 
and the little ones did not understand, or were offended at her. 


CHAPTER CXLIII 


Wuen Peter and his wife entered the drawing-room, the countess 
was in her usual mood, at that hour, of desiring to exercise her 
intellect in the game of "grand patience," and therefore, 
despite the fact that she said the accustomed formula which 
she always employed when Peter or her son returned from 
a journey—" It was time, quite time, that you were back, my 
dear; you have been away too long; but thanks be to God 
that you are home again," as well as said, when presented with 
the gifts, her equally stereotyped formula of, “I do not deserve 
a present, my dear one, but I thank you for remembering an 
old woman like me," it was clear that Peter's entry at that 
moment was unwelcome to her, since it distracted her from 
her unfinished game of patience. Accordingly, she finished her 
game before looking at the gifts, which consisted of a beautifully 
worked card-box, a bright blue Sévres bowl with a lid to it 
and painted with figures of shepherdesses, and a gold snuff-box 
engraved with the late count’s portrait, which Peter had 
ordered of a miniature painter in St. Petersburg (the countess 
had long desired to have this). At that particular moment 
she did not happen to be in the mood for weeping, so she looked 
quite calmly at the portrait, and devoted more attention to the 
card-box. 

“T thank you, my dear. You have pleased me greatly,” 
she said, as she always did. “But your own return is the best 
gift of all. Never have I beheld anything like the way in 
which your wife has been worrying about you. She was like 
a mad woman in your absence. But I see and remember little 
nowadays” (this was another stereotyped formula of the old 
lady’s). “Look, Anna Timotheevna,” she added. “See the 
card-box which my son-in-law has brought me.” 

Madame Bielova duly praised the gifts, and was in raptures 
over her own dress-length. Although Peter, Natacha, Nicholas, 
Maria, and Denissow had much to say to one another which 
could not very well be said in the old countess’s presence—not 


405 


WAR AND PEACE 


because any concealment was necessary, but because she was so 
remote from much of their life that, when they began to speak 
of anything in her hearing, they had to answer her random 
questions, to repeat things over and over again, and to say, 
many times in succession, that such and such a person was 
married or dead whom she could not in the least recali—they 
gathered as usual in the drawing-room for tea, Peter had many 
questions to satisfy her about—questions to which she did not 
really desire any answer, and which interested no one— to tell 
her that Prince Vassilii was getting an old man, that the Countess 
Maria Alexievna had sent her her greetings and remembrances, 
and so forth. 

Conversation of this kind—interesting to no one, but inevit- 
able—lasted throughout the meal. All the grown-up members 
of the family disposed themselves about the circular table 
where Sonia presided at the tea-urn. The children, too, as 
well as their tutors and governesses, had had tea, and could 
now be heard talking in the adjoining ante-room. Everyone 
always occupied the same place at that hour. Nicholas always 
sat behind the little table near the stove where his tea had been 
brought to him, while on a bench by his side lay an old borzoi 
with a grey muzzle and large, black, prominent eyes. This 
was Milka, daughter of the original Milka. Denissow, with 
grizzled slightly curly hair, moustache, and whiskers, and 
dressed in an unbuttoned generals tunic, sat beside the Countess 
Maria. Peter sat between his wife and the old countess, to the 
latter of whom he was now relating what he knew would be 
interesting and intelligible to the old lady. That is to say, he 
was speaking to her of foreign affairs, and of the men who 
had once composed her circle of intimates—men who had once 
formed an active and influential coterie, but of whom the greater 
number were now dispersed over the world, and, having, like 
herself, outlived their day, were reaping the last ears of the 
crop which they had sown during their lifetime. Yet to the old 
countess these former intimates of hers still appeared a real and 
serious world. From Peter's animation Natacha could see that 
his journey had been full of interest, and that he had much 
to say about it which he could not Say before the countess. 
Denissow, who was not a member of the family, and therefore 
failed to understand Peter's cautions, did not approve of the 
latter, since he took a great interest in what was going on in 
St. Petersburg. Consequently he kept asking Peter about the 
affair of the Séménovsky Regiment, about Araktchéiew, the 


406 


EPILOGUE 


literary society, and so forth. Sometimes Peter would forget 
himself, and begin to talk unguardedly, but at such moments 
Nicholas or Natacha always headed him back to topics like the 
health of Prince Ivan or the Countess Maria Antonovna. 

“Now, about this foolishness—Tatarinow and so on; is it all 
still going on?" Denissow inquired. 

“Ts it all still going on?” re-echoed Peter. “Why, it is 
going on more than ever. The literary society means simply 
the Government.” 

“Means simply what, mon cher ami ?” put in the old countess, 
who had drunk her tea, and was now casting about for an 
excuse for a little temper. “What do you refer to when you 
say ‘the Government’? I do not understand you.” 

“You must know, mamma,” interpolated Nicholas, who 
knew how things were best translated into his mother’s language, 
“that Prince A. N. Golitzin has lately formed a society, and is 
said to be very strong now.” 

“Golitzin and Araktchéiew,” corrected Peter incautiously. 
“As I say, it means simply the Government. And what a 
Government! They see conspiracies everywhere, and are afraid 
of everyone.” 

“Oh, but who could find fault with Prince Alexander 
Nicolaevitch, I should like to know?” demanded the old 
countess in a tone of offence. “He is a man above reproach. 
I often used to meet him at Maria Antonovna’s.” Then, 
growing still more vexed because no one spoke, she continued: 
“To-day they find fault with everything. The gospel society, 
for instance—what is there wrong about that?” With this 
she arose (as also did the others), and departed with an air of 
dudgeon to her table in the ante-room. 

The rather glum silence which ensued was broken by the 
sound of children laughing and shouting in the adjoining 
apartment. It was clear that some joyous excitement was 
afoot there. 

“Tt is ready now, it is ready now!” came in the merry lisp 
of the tiny Natacha, over-topping all the rest. Peter exchanged 
glances with Nicholas and Maria (Natacha’s eye he always held) 
and smiled a happy smile. 

“That is splendid music to hear!” he said. 

“Tt means that Anna Makarovna has finished the stocking," 
said the Countess Maria. ] 

*I will go and see the performance," said Peter, jumping up. 
“Of course you know," he added, halting in the doorway, 


407 


WAR AND PEACE 


“why I love that music so. I love it because it is always the 
first thing to let me know that all is well with the children. 
To-day, as I was coming home, the nearer I drew to the house, 
the more nervous I grew: yet I had no sooner entered the 
portico than behold! I heard Andrusha’s voice uplifted about 
something, and knew at once that all was well.” 

“Yes, yes; I know the feeling,” agreed Nicholas. “But J 
must not go in there, for it may be that the stockings are 
a surprise of some sort for me.” 

So Peter departed alone to the children, and immediately the 
laughter and shouting redoubled. 

“Now, Anna Makarovna," Peter's voice could be heard 
saying, "step this way into the middle of the circle at my 
command. I shall say ‘one, two, and then you must do it 
at the word ‘three.’ You stand there, and you here beside 
me. Now—one, two," continued Peter as a dead silence fell, 
* and—three /" 

Instantly the rapturous din of childish voices resounded 
through the room. “They are two, they are two!” they cried. 
By the “two” they meant the two stockings which, by some 
secret known only to herself, Anna Makarovna knitted at once 
and then—to the children's intense delight—solemnly pulled 
apart when finished. 


CHAPTER CXLIV 


SooN after this the children came to say good night. They 
kissed everybody all round, and then their tutors and 
governesses also took their leave and departed. Only Dessalles 
and his pupil remained. When the tutor proposed to the boy 
in a whisper that he should go downstairs with the others, 
Nicolenka objected. 

"No, Monsieur Dessalles, I will ask my aunt to let me stay 
here," he whispered in return. “Aunt, let me stay here," he 
continued, running to Maria. His face was charged with 
entreaty, rapture, and excitement. Maria looked at him, and 
then turned to Peter. 

“When you are here he simply cannot tear himself away,” 
she said. 

"I will send him to you in a moment, Monsieur Dessalles," 
said Peter as he shook hands with the Swiss tutor and smilingly 


408 


EPILOGUE 


turned to Nicolenka again. “You and I have not seen enough 
of each other yet. What a likeness I see in him!” he added to 
Maria. 

* A likeness to my father?” asked the boy, blushing vividly, 
and surveying Peter with sparkling, enraptured eyes. 

Peter nodded an assent, and then continued the story which 
the children had interrupted. Maria was working something 
on canvas, and Natacha sat with her eyes fixed upon her 
husband. Presently Nicholas and Denissow rose, asked for 
their pipes, lighted them, and, after procuring themselves fresh 
glasses of tea from Sonia where she sat humbly and dejectedly 
by the tea-urn, fell to plying Peter with questions. The 
delicate, curly-headed Nicholas, with his radiant eyes, sat 
unnoticed in a corner, where, as from time to time he turned 
his curly head and slender neck with its broad collar in Peter’s 
direction, he would give a sudden start, and whisper something 
to himself, under the evident influence of some new and 
overpowering emotion. 

The conversation turned on the kind of gossip which emanates 
from government circles, and which most people in those days 
thought the most important interest in home policy. Denissow 
who bore a grudge against the Government because of his failure 
in the service, listened gladly to these tales of the (so he deemed 
them) foolish goings on which were taking place in St. Peters- 
burg, and commented upon them in strong and sarcastic terms 
as Peter proceeded. 

“Tn olden days one needed to be a German,” he said, “and 
now one needs to dance with Mesdames Tatarinow and Kriidner, 
and to read Eckarstrausen and all that kind of thing. If only 
someone would release our young friend Bonaparte once more! 
He would soon send these fools packing. What, for instance, 
is the use of giving the command of the Séménovsky Regiment 
to that fellow Schwarz?” 

Nicholas had not the same desire to vent his spleen as 
Denissow, yet he too thought it both necessary and correct to 
criticise the Government, and considered that the appointment 
of A to such and such a ministry, or of B to be governor and 
commander-in-chief of such and such a place, or for the emperor 
to say such and such a thing, or for a minister to say such and 
such another, were all of them very important matters. Conse- 
quently, deeming that he ought to take an interest in such things, 
he helped to ply Peter with questions. After the catechism was 
finished the conversation did not wander beyond mere gossip 


409 


WAR AND PEACE 


about the higher circles of government. Natacha, however, 
knew the whole gamut of her husband’s views, and saw that 
Peter had long been trying—though in vain—to divert the 
conversation and to expound his pet idea—the idea concerning 
which he had gone to St. Petersburg to take counsel with his 
new friend, Prince Theodore. Accordingly she gave him a hand 
by asking him what his business had been with the prince. 

“Yes, what was it?” said Nicholas also. 

“The same as before,” said Peter, after glancing about him. 
“Everyone can see that things are going on so disgracefully 
that they cannot be left as they are, and that all respectable 
men must oppose them so far as possible.” 

“But what can respectable men do?” asked Nicholas with 
a slight frown. “What can they do?” 

“They can do this: that—” 

“Let us go into the study,” interrupted Nicholas. Natacha, 
who had long been expecting to be sent for to feed the children, 
heard the nurse’s call at this moment, and departed to the 
nursery. Maria went with her, while the men adjourned to the 
study—little Nicolenka, unnoticed by his uncle, adjourning 
with them, and secreting himself in a dark corner near the 
window, by a writing-table. 

“Well now, what would you do?” asked Denissow. 

“Keep on with the same old fancies,” said Nicholas. 

“No, the position is this,” began Peter without sitting down 
but alternately pacing the room and standing still as he lisped 
out his words and made quick gestures with his hands. “The 
emperor stands aside from everything, for he is too much given 
up to this specious mysticism” (Peter could pardon no one for 
mysticism at that time). “He wants quiet—nothing more; and 
only men who lack both a faith and a conscience—people who 
dissect everything, and then dismiss it with a shrug of their 
shoulders—can give him that. I mean men like Magnitsky, 
Araktchéiew, and so forth. You agree, Nicholas, do you not, 
that if you did not care about your estate, but wanted only to 
be quiet, you would attain your end the better in proportion as 
your foreman exerted himself?” 

“Well, what are you driving at?” asked Nicholas. 

“At this. Everything is going to ruin. There is thieving in 
the law courts and constant flogging in the army. The people 
are being wearied to death with forced emigration and settle- 
ment, and civilisation is being strangled. All that is young and 
of high principle in the nation is being corrupted. Everyone 


410 


EPILOGUE 


can see that things cannot go on much longer like that. Every- 
thing is stretched at too high a tension, and must inevitably 
break.” Peter spoke as men have spoken of the policy of their 
governments since governments first came into existence. “One 
thing in particular I said to them in St. Petersburg.” 

“To whom?” asked Denissow. 

“You know to whom, answered Peter, with a meaning look 
from under his eyebrows. “To Prince Theodore and all the 
rest of them, of course. Rivalry in civilisation and good works 
is a splendid thing—that goes without saying; but at the present 
moment we need something else." 

At that moment Nicholas noticed that his little nephew was 
present. His face darkened as he strode towards the boy. 

“Why are you here?” he asked him. 

*Why should he not be? Leave him alone," said Peter, 
taking Nicholas by the arm, and then continuing: “As I say, 
at the present moment we have need of something else. While 
you are standing waiting for the over-tense string to break, and 
everyone is looking for the inevitable revolution, it is our duty 
to close up the ranks of the people as much as possible if we are 
to face the general catastrophe. All that is young and strong in 
the nation is being seduced and corrupted. Women are used 
to seduce one man, presents another, windy words a third, 
money a fourth—and they all go over to the other camp. Of 
free, independent men like you and myself there are none left. 
What I said, then, in St. Petersburg was: * Widen the scope of 
our society, and let the mot d'ordre be not so much beneficence 
as independence and activity. " 

Nicholas left his nephew, gave the bench an angry shove, and 
sat down upon it. As he sat listening to Peter he uttered an 
occasional grunt of dissatisfaction, and frowned more than ever. 

* Yes, but activity to what end?" he cried. “In what 
relation do you mean to stand to the Government?” 

“Tn what relation? Why, as its assistants, of course. The 
society need not be a secret one unless the Government declines 
to recognise it. It is not only a society friendly to the Govern- 
ment, but an association of genuine Conservatives. In fact, it is 
a society of gentlemen in the true sense of the word. Its aim is 
merely to prevent Pougatchew from coming and cutting your and 
my children’s throats, and Araktchéiew from sending me to a 
military settlement. That is all that we are joining hands 
for—tor the one aim of the common weal and the common 


security.” 


411 


WAR AND PEACE 


~ Yes, but it is a secret society, all the same, and thereiare a 
militant and harmful one—one that can only breed mischief” 

“Why so? Was the T'ugemd-bumd ! which saved Europe” 
(people did not then dare to assert that it was Russia whe had 
saved her) “productive of anything harmful? On the Contrary, 
it was a socety of public benefactors. It stood fer love and 
mutual co-operation, Well, that was what Christ preached upon 
the Cross.” 

Natacha, entering the room in the middle of this discussion, 
gazed approvingly at her husband. It was not what he was 
saying that she approved of so much, That did net even 
interest her, for it all appeared to her so extremely simple, and 
as though she had known it Ñr a long time. It xte 
her because she knew the whole of what it proceeded from, ie 
the whole of Peter’s soul. What she approved of, as she gazed - 
at him, was his animated, enraptured Sgum, 

Sub greater admiration of Peter filled the little bey who, 
forgotten by everyone, sat with his slender neck protruding 
eagerly above his broad white collar. Every werd of Peter's 
be Ua Seog i eh, Viet anne i la lags 
breaking the sealing-wax and pens on his de's writing-ta 
with the nervous movements of his Sngers. 

"The German Tugesi-bumd was not what you think, It was 
simply what I have stated." 

“Well, my good sir, the Turemd-jumd may have done well 

for the sausage-eaters, but I do not understand it— 
although I also do not condemn it," said Denissow in his loud, 
insistent voice, "Everything here is bad and rotten, I admit, 
but I still do not fathom that Pagenddund of yours, ner do | 
care about it. A dunt 3—that is the thing. I sheuld be your 
man at once," 

Peter smiled and Natacha laughed aloud, but Nicholas only 
— the oes Peter that no revolution was to 

apprehended, t all the dangers which he s QÈ 
existed only in his imagination. Peter again asserted con- 
trary, and since his intellectual powers were the stronger and 
more resourceful of the two, Nicholas soon found himself nonm 
plussed. This irritated him the more in that in his heart he 
knew—not by reasoning, but by something stronger than 
reasoning—that his opinion was undoubtedly the right one. 


a thn Bud st Vir, A German society firmed im riigas e the 
P evolution a pun on the Snal syllable o£. Tugend-Ound. 


412 


EPILOGUE 


“Well, that is all I have to say,” he declared as he rose with 
some agitation and went to a corner to lay his pipe aside. “I 
cannot prove it to you, of course. You say that everything 
is going wrong with us, and that we shall soon have a revolution. 
I do not see it at all. You assert also that an oath is only a 
conditional affair. Well, in answer to that I have to say that, 
although you are my best friend, as you yourself know, I for 
my part know that, should you form a secret society or begin 
in any way to oppose the Government (no matter what sort 
of a Government it be), I shall always feel it my duty to obey 
that Government, and that, should Araktchéiew bid me ride 
against you with a squadron and cut you down, I shall never 
hesitate for a moment to do so. You must make what you 
like of that.” 

An awkward silence ensued upon these words. Natacha 
was the first to break it, and she took the line of defending her 
husband and attacking Nicholas. Her defence was weak and 
clumsy, yet she attained her object. The discussion began 
again, but not in that unpleasantly bitter tone in which 
Nicholas’s last words had been spoken. When they rose to go 
to supper, Nicolenka Bolkonsky approached Peter with a pale 
face and his eyes radiant. 

“Uncle Peter, you—you are not—if papa had been alive 
he would have agreed with you, would he not?” he asked him. 

In a flash, Peter understood what an extraordinary indepen- 
lent, complex, and strenuous process must have been proceeding 
in the heart and brain of this boy during the discussion. Yet, 
as he recalled all that he himself had said, he felt vexed that 
Nicolenka should have overheard it. However, he had to give 
an answer of some kind. 

“On the whole I think—yes,” he said reluctantly, and then 
left the room. The boy hung his head, and then saw for the 
first time what he had done on the writing-table. He gave 
a gasp, and walked straight up to Nicholas. 

“Uncle, I am so sorry,” he said. “I did this without think- 
ing,” and he pointed to the broken pens and sealing-wax. 
Nicholas started irritably. 

* Very well, very well." he said as he threw the pieces under 
the table. Then, evidently restraining his anger with some 
difficulty, he walked away. 

* You ought not to have been here at all," he remarked. 


413 


WAR AND PEACE 


CHAPTER CXLV 


AFTER supper the conversation turned no more on politics and 
societies, but, on the contrary, on the most pleasing of topics 
to Nicholas—namely, reminiscences of 1812. It was Denissow 
who first started the subject, and Peter was particularly agree- 
able and interesting over it. Thus the relatives parted for 
the night on the best of terms. 

After Nicholas had undressed in his study and given his 
orders to the waiting steward he proceeded in his dressing-gown 
to his bedroom, where he found his wife still writing at her 
writing-table. 

“What are you jotting down, Maria?” he asked. 

The Countess Maria blushed, for she was afraid that what | 
she was writing would not be understood and approved of by 
her husband. She would gladly have hidden it from him, 
but at the same time he did not feel altogether displeased that his 
surprising her at that moment now forced her to tell him what 
It was. 

"It is my diary, Nicholas," sbe said as she handed him a 
blue note-book filled with her large, firm handwriting. 

“A diary?" queried Nicholas with a shade of ridicule in his 
tone, and took the book into his hands. It was written in 
Frencb. 

“December 4th. To-day Andrusha refused to have his clothes 
put on when it came to getting-up time, so Mademoiselle Louise 
sent for me. He was most naughty and obstinate. I tried 
threatening him, but he only grew the more determined. Then 
I turned away, as though to leave him alone, and began to 
help the nurse to get the other children up, saying that I did 
not love him. For a while he was silent, as though surprised. 
Then, clad only in his night-shirt, he suddenly threw himself 
upon me, and burst into such a passion of weeping that it was 
long before I could comfort him. It was clear that what had 
distressed him most of all was to think that he had vexed me. 
Afterwards, in the evening, when I gave him his conduct ticket, 
he cried again most pitifully as he kissed me. Tenderness can 
do anything with him." 

“What is that ‘conduct ticket'?" asked Nicholas. 

“Oh, I have begun to give the elder ones reports each evening 
as to how they have behaved during the day.” 

Nicholas looked at the brilliant eyes gazing at him, and then 


414 


EPILOGUE 


went on turning the leaves and reading. In the diary there 
was entered everything in the children’s life which had seemed 
to the mother worthy of note, either as expressive of her 
children’s characters, or as furnishing ideas concerning the best 
methods of educating them. The entries were mostly the 
merest trifles, but they did not seem so either to the mother 
or to the father as he now stood reading for the first time this 
daily record of the nursery. 

For the sth of December he found entered: “To-day Mitia 
started to be naughty at table, so papa said that he was to have 
no tart. Accordingly he was given none, but he looked so 
wistfully and hungrily at the others as they ate! I think that 
to punish a child by giving him no sweets only develops greed. 
I must say so to Nicholas.” 

Nicholas stopped reading, and glanced at Maria. Her 
shining eyes were gazing inquiringly at him, as though to see 
whether he approved of the diary or not. There could be no 
doubt, not only of his approval of it, but of the delight he took 
in his wife. Possibly he thought that the whole thing need 
not have been done so pedantically, or even that it was unneces- 
sary; yet this constant, tireless, heartfelt anxiety of hers for 
his children’s moral welfare pleased him beyond measure. It 
at that moment he could have analysed his own feelings, he 
would have found that the chief thing upon which his proud, 
tender, assured love for his wife was based was just this very 
wonder at her thoroughness and at the high moral sphere, far 
above his own powers of attainment, in which she always lived. 
He felt proud that she should be so wise and so good, while he 
recognised also his own inferiority to her in the realm of 
spirituality. Still more did it delight him to think that not 
only did she belong to him in her heart, but that she constituted 
an actual part of himself. 

*Iam very, very pleased with it," he said of the diary with 
an expressive look. Then, after a moment's silence, he added: 
* Now, I have been behaving badly to-day. You see, you were 
not in the study to stop me. I quarrelled with Peter, and grew 
quite heated over it. He is impossible sometimes, he is such 
a child. I do not know what would become of him if Natacha 
did not hold him on the bit. Can you guess why he has been 
to St. Petersburg? Why, they have organised there a—" 

“Yes, I know,” said the Countess Maria. “Natacha told 
me of it." 

* Oh, so you know, then?" continued Nicholas, warming at 


415 


WAR AND PEACE 


the mere recollection of the dispute. “Well, he wanted to 
persuade me that every honourable man ought to oppose the 
Government now, in defiance at once of allegiance and duty. 
I only wish you had been there. They all set upon me—that 
is to say, Denissow and Natacha as well. Natacha is absolutely 
absurd. Why, she holds Peter under her thumb, yet, when 
it comes to political opinions, she has not a word to say for 
herself, but just says what he does.” Nicholas could not 
resist the impulse which sometimes leads people to criticise . 
their nearest and dearest friends. He forgot that, word for 
word, the same might have been said of himself in his relation 
to his wife. 

“Yes, I have noticed it,” said Maria. 

“When I told him that home duties and the oath of allegiance 
ranked above everything else he started out to prove to me the 
Lord only knows what. You should have been there to hear 
him. What should you have said in my place?” 

“In my opinion you were perfectly right. I told Natacha so. 
Peter says that everyone is being oppressed, interfered with, 
and corrupted, and that it is our duty to help our neighbour. 
Of course he is right in that, but at the same time he forgets 
that we have other and even more intimate duties which God 
Himself has laid upon us, and that, though we may take risks 
for ourselves, we may not do so for our children." 


that I am neglecting him for my own children. You see, we 
have our children and relations, but he has no one. He is 
always alone with his thoughts." 

"You have no reason to reproach yourself. All that the 
tenderest of mothers could do for her son you have done, and 
do, for him. Of course, I am delighted that it should be so. 
He is a wonderful, wonderful little fellow. To-night he must 
have fallen into a kind of trance as he sat listening to Peter, for, 
just as we were getting up to go to supper, he came to me to say 
that he had broken everything on my writing-table. Indeed, 
I have never known him tell an untruth. Yes, he is a wonderful, 
wonderful little fellow,” repeated Nicholas, who was not over. 


416 


EPILOGUE 


fond of Nicolenka in his heart. yet always tried to think the 
best of him. 

“Oh, but I am not the same as a mother to him,” said Maria. 
“T feel that I am not, and that worries me. He is an excep- 
tional boy, and I am terribly afraid for him. He needs more 
companionship.” 

“Oh well, it will not be for long; I am going to send him 
away to St. Petersburg in the summer,” said Nicholas. “Yes, 
Peter is, and always was, a dreamer,” he continued, returning 
to the conversation in the study, which seemed to have moved 
him greatly. “Yet what have I got to do with it all—with 
Araktchéiew being a villain, and so forth? What business was 
it of mine when I married and had so many debts that I was in 
danger of being put in prison, and a mother who would not see 
or understand my difficulties. And then—you, children, my 
duties. Do I spend my days from morning to night in the 
office for my own pleasure? No. All I know is that my 
business is to comfort my mother, to repay you, and not to 
leave the children such paupers as I myself was." 

Maria would have told him that a man ought not to engage 
solely in bread-winning, and that he (Nicholas) attached too 
much importance to his estate work, had she not known that it 
was both useless and unnecessary to do so Accordingly she 
just took his hand and kissed it. This caress he took to mean 
approval of what he had said and assent to his ideas, so, after 
a moment's silent reflection, he went on thinking aloud. 

*Do you know, Maria, Ilia Mitrofanitch" (one of the fore- 
men of works) “came over from the Tambov village to-day, 
and told me that 80,000 roubles have been offered for the timber 
there." Then, his face beaming, Nicholas went on to speak of 
the possibility of very soon redeeming Otradnoé. “Granted 
another ten years of life," he said, “and I shall leave my 
children in a good position." 

The Countess Maria heard and understood all that her 
husband was saying, for she knew that when he had been 
thinking aloud in this way he sometimes asked her afterwards 
what he had said, and was vexed when she admitted that she 
had been thinking of something else. Yet to do this she had to 
make great efforts, since what he was saying in no way interested 
her. She kept her eyes fixed upon him, and thus contrived 
only to feel, not to think of, something else. She felt a sincere 
and tender love in her heart for this man who could never 
understand all that she understood, and the very fact made 


417 


WAR AND PEACE 


her love him all the more—made her love him with a touch 
of passionate devotion. Yet over and above that feeling, 
which absorbed her whole self and prevented her from fully 
comprehending all the details of her husband’s plans, there kept 
passing through her brain ideas which had nothing in common 
with what he was saying. She kept thinking of her nephew 
(her husband’s account of his agitation at Peter’s discourse had 
struck her greatly), and different traits in his sensitive, affec- 
tionate nature kept presenting themselves to her mind. This 
led her on to think also of her own children. She did not com- 
pare them with her nephew, but only her own feelings towards 
them, and recognised with regret that in her feelings towards 
Nicolenka there was something wanting. Sometimes the idea 
occurred to her that this difference arose from their different 
ages, but, for all that, she felt guilty towards Nicolenka, and. 
promised herself in her heart to make amends and to do the 
impossible, ie. to love in this life both her husband, her 
children, Nicolenka, and her neighbour as Christ loves all 
humanity. Maria’s spirit tended always towards the infinite, 
the eternal, and the complete, and therefore was never at rest. 
This strenuous and sublime yearning of soul expressed itself in 
the drawn expression of her face and the tenseness of her 
frame. As Nicholas looked at her it suddenly occurred to him: 
"My God! what would become of us all if she were to die? 
Somehow her face makes me feel that that might happen soon.” 
Then, taking his stand before the ikon, he began to read the 
evening prayers. 


CHAPTER CXLVI 


Waen Natacha found herself alone with her husband she fell to 
discussing matters with him as only a wife can do with her help- 
meet, i.e. exchanging ideas with extraordinary perspicuity and 
swiftness, as well as by a method at once contrary to all the 
known rules of logic and independent of all fixed opinions, con- 
clusions, and deductions—a method, in fact, peculiar to married 
couples. Natacha was so accustomed to employ this method 
with her husband that, when he began to express his thoughts 
to her in logical sequence, she knew infallibly that some differ- 
ence was looming between them. He had only to begin to 
prove things at length and to speak quietly and consecutively 


418 


EPILOGUE 


and she to follow his example, for her to scent a quarrel in the 
distance. 

From the moment when they were left alone, and Natacha, 
approaching him with happy, expectant eyes, had clasped him 
round the neck with sudden, tender swiftness, and pressed him 
to her bosom, saying, “Now you are altogether mine, mine! 
You are not going away again!”—from that moment there 
began a conversation opposed to all the rules of logic in that it 
turned at one and the same time upon entirely different topics. 
This simultaneous embracing of many subjects not only did 
nothing to impair clearness of mutual comprehension, but, on 
the contrary, was the truest sign that the pair understood one 
another. Just as, in a dream, everything may be unreal, mean- 
ingless, and contradictory except the feelings which animate 
the sleeper, so nothing that was said during this irrational 
communion of husband and wife was clearly expressed—only 
the feelings which animated them both. 

Natacha spoke to Peter of her brother’s daily life and affairs, 
of how she had suffered—indeed, had scarcely lived at all— 
during the absence of her husband, and of how she loved Maria 
more than ever, although Maria was in all respects superior to 
her. In saying this, Natacha was quite candid in her acknow- 
ledgment of Maria’s superiority, but at the same time she 
implied that she meant Peter to prefer herself to her sister- 
in-law or any other woman, and that now, when he had 
just been seeing so many other women in St. Petersburg, was 
the moment for his making a fresh confession of his faith. 
Accordingly Peter declared that he had found all his evening 
parties and dinners in the company of the ladies of St. Petersburg 
insupportable. 

“T have got out of the way of talking to such fine dames,” 
he said with unaffected weariness. “Moreover, I was so busy 
at the time.” 

Natacha looked hard at him, and then went on: 

“Maria is so charming! How well she understands children! 
She seems to see into their very souls. Yesterday, for instance, 
Mitenka began to be naughty and—” 

“How like his father the boy is!" put in Peter. 

Natacha knew quite well why he interpolated this remark 
about Mitenka’s likeness to Nicholas. He still felt sore over 
the recollection of his quarrel with his brother-in-law, and 
wished to have Natacha’s opinion of the subject. 

“Dear Nicholas has this weakness,” said Natacha, “that, 


419 


WAR AND PEACE 


unless a particular thing is accepted by all, he will agree to 
nothing. And you only value ‘opening up the quarry,” she 
said, repeating an expression he had used. 

“No, the truth of the matter is,” said Peter, “that, for 
Nicholas, all views and ideas are only an amusement—one 
might almost say, only a passing of the time. As you know, 
he collects books, and makes it his rule never to buy a new one 
until he has read his last purchase—whether it be Sismondi, 
Rousseau, Montesqueiu, or anything else,” added Peter with a 
smile. “Well, you know, too, how I—" Here Peter began 
to soften the impression of what he had said, but Natacha 
interrupted liim to show that it wasn’t necessary. 

“So you say that, for him, ideas are only an amusement?” 

“Yes, while for myself everything else is only an amusement. 
All the time that I was in St. Petersburg I saw everyone as in 
a dream. When an idea has taken hold of me, everything else 
becomes futility.” 

“Ah, how I wish I had seen you when you greeted the 
children:” was Natacha’s next remark. “Which of them was 
the most delighted? Lisa, I expect.” 

“Yes,” said Peter, and went on with what was in his mind. 
“Nicholas, you know, says that we ought not to think. Now, I 
cannot accept that. Throughout the whole of my Stay in St. 
Petersburg I kept thinking (I may say this to you) that, but for 
myself, the whole thing must come to the ground. Every man 
is pulling in a different direction, and it is for me to unite them 
all; after which my idea will become clear and simple enough. 
Of course I did not say that we need Oppose anyone in particular. 
All that I said was: ‘Join hands all you who value what is 
right, and let there be one flag over you—the flag of active 
well-doing.’ You see, Prince Sergius is a sensible man, and 
clever.” 

Natacha never doubted for a moment that Peter’s idea was 
a great one, yet one thing confused her. That was the fact that 
he was her husband. “Can a man who is so important and 
necessary to the community really be my husband? How has 
that come about?” Then she tried to explain the difficulty to 
herself. “Who are the men who have decided that he is so 
much cleverer than the rest of them?” she thought as she ran 
over in her mind the people whom he most respected. Of 
them, according to what he himself often said, he most respected 
Plato Karataiew. 

“Do you know of whom I am thinking?” she said. “Of 


420 


EPILOGUE 


Plato Karataiew. What about him? Would he have agreed 
with you?" 

Peter was not at all surprised at the question, since he 
understood the trend of his wife's thoughts. 

"Plato Karataiew?" he replied, and then reflected for a 
moment—evidently trying his best to imagine what Karataiew's 
opinion would have been on the subject. ^ He would never 
have understood it—though, of course, he might have done,” 
he thought to himself. 

“Oh, I love you so!” cried Natacha suddenly. “Yes, ever 
and ever so much 

*No, he would not have agreed with me," went on Peter, 
still deep in thought. “The kind of thing that he would have 
approved of would have been this family life of ours. He 
always yearned to see beauty and happiness and peace in every- 
thing, and I could have pointed with pride to ourselves. You 
know, you talk of separations, but you cannot imagine what an 
affection I have for you after there has been one." 

“Yes, at present,” began Natacha. 

* No, no! I shall love you always, and could not possibly love 
you more than I do. That is certain. You know—" He did 
not finish the sentence, for their eyes met at that moment and 
told them the rest. 

* How stupid people are to think that the honeymoon is the 
best time!" said Natacha. ''The present is far better. If only 
you would never go away again! What a lot of quarrels we 
have had in our time! And it was I, always I, that was in the 
wrong. But what we generally quarrelled about I cannot so 
much as remember." 

* Always about the same thing," said Peter with a smile, 
* About jeal—” 

“Do not say the word—I cannot bear it!" exclaimed Na-acha 
while a cold, vindictive gleam showed itself for a moment in her 
eyes. “Did you see her?" she added after a moment's silence. 

“No. At least, I may have seen her, but I did not recognise 
her." 

They were both of them silent a moment. 

*Do you know," went on Natacha, evidently wishing to 
dissipate the passing cloud, “ while you were talking in the study 
to-night I kept looking at you, and thought to myself how 
exactly you and the boy" (she meant her little son) " resemble 
one another. Well, it is time I went to him now—quite time, 
but I hate to leave you." 


, 


|» 


421 


WAR AND PEACE 


For a few moments they remained silent again. Then, 
suddenly turning to one another, they both of them began 
to speak at the same moment—Peter eagerly and with self- 
assurance, and Natacha with a quiet, happy smile. Then, 
their words clashing, each of them stopped to let the other 
one speak. 

“What were you going to say? You speak first,” he said. 

"No, no. What were you going to say? How stupid of 
me!" she replied. 

Accordingly Peter finished what he had begun, ie. a fresh 
instalment of his confident opinions about his success in St. 
Petersburg. At that moment he felt as though he had been 
called upon to impart a new tendency to the whole Russian 
community and the world at large. 

“T only wished to say,” he explained, “that all ideas which 
have great results are essentially simple ones. My own idea 
consists only in thinking that, if the baser sort combine together 
to form a political force, the upright should do the same. How 
simple that is!” 

“Yes, indeed.” 

“And what were you going to say 

“Oh, nothing. I am so stupid.” 

“No, but tell me.” 

“Nothing, nothing—mere rubbish,” said Natacha, beaming 
more radiantly than ever. “I only wanted to tell you about 
Pétia. To-night when nurse came to take him away to bed, 
he laughed so, and pouted, and clung to me! Evidently the 
little monkey thought that he was successfully hiding himself. 
He is so extraordinarily good-tempered. There! I can hear 
him calling for me now. Well, good-bye for the moment,” and 
she left the room. 

Meanwhile in Nicolenka’s bedroom a lamp was burning as 
usual (for the boy was afraid of the dark, and could not be cured 
of his failing). Dessalles was asleep, propped up on his cus- 
tomary four high pillows, and emitting portentous snores from 
his nose at regular intervals. Nicolenka had just started up 
from sleep in a cold perspiration, and was now sitting on his bed 
with his eyes wide open and gazing fixedly in front of him. It 
was a horrible dream which had aroused him. In that dream 
he had seen himself and Peter, clad in helmets such as Plutarch 
describes, marching at the head of a great army. The army 
was composed wholly of slanting white threads, which filled the 
air as the spiders’ webs do which float about in the autumn— 


422 


EPILOGUE 


the kind of gossamer which Dessalles used to call fil de la Vierge. 
In front of the army lay Glory, also composed of threads, but 
looking denser. All this while Peter and he were marching with 
easy, joyous strides towards a goal, when suddenly the threads 
which had hitherto moved them began to give way and become 
entangled, so that marching became difficult. Then of a sudden 
Peter and Nicolenka found themselves confronted by Uncle 
Nicholas, who was standing in a stern and menacing attitude. 
“Did you do this?” he said to Nicolenka as he pointed to 
the broken sealing-wax and pens. “I loved you once, but 
Araktchéiew has given me his orders, and I am to slay the first 
one of you who advances a step further." Nicolenka looked 
about him for Peter, but Peter had disappeared, and in his place 
stood Nicolenka's father, Prince Andrew, and that father was 
without shape or outline, yet still there. As Nicolenka gazed 
at him he became conscious of the weakness of love—became 
conscious of being without strength, without bones or marrow. 
His father was caressing and pitying him, yet Uncle Nicholas 
still kept drawing nearer. At length, carried away by his 
terror, the boy awoke. 

“My father!" he thought to himself. “Yes, my father” 
(there were two portraits of Prince Andrew in the house, yet 
Nicolenka had never imagined him in human form) “was with 
me and being kind to me. He approved of me, too, and 
approved of Uncle Peter. Whatsoever henceforth he bids me 
to do I will do it. Mucius Scaevola could thrust his own right 
hand into the flame: why, then, should I not do the same in 
my life? I know they want me to become a learned man, and 
I will become one, but some day, too, I will put aside my books, 
and do things. Only one thing do I ask God—that He will 
let me do as Plutarch's men did. Ves, and I will do even better 
than they. Everyone shall know of me, everyone love me, 
everyone applaud me." All at once Nicolenka felt the sobs 
rising in his breast, and he burst into tears. 

* Are you not well?" he heard Dessalles say. 

“Oh, it is nothing,” answered the boy as he lay down again 
upon his pillow. . 

*He is kind and good, and I love him," he thought of 
Dessalles; “but Uncle Peter—what a splendid man he is! And 
my father too! Yes, I will do such things as shall please even 


him.” 


423 


WAR AND PEACE 


PAR II 


CHAPTER CXLVII 


THE subject of history is the life of nations and of humanity. 
Yet to describe precisely the life even of a single nation, much 
less that of all humanity, would appear to be impossible. The 
older historians had one unvarying method of condensing and 
describing the life of a given people. They simply wrote of the 
parts played by the individuals who stood in authority over 
that people, and let those parts stand for the part played by 
the nation as a whole. To the two questions of how individuals 
could contrive to compel whole peoples to act according to 
their will and of how such will itself was directed those historians 
replied by saying, firstly, that it was through the Divine Dis- 
pensation that nations were brought to submit themselves to 
the will of one person alone, and secondly, that it was through 
the same Divine Dispensation that the will of the chosen 
individual was directed towards a predestined end. In fact, 
the older historians decided both the one question and the other 
by expressing their belief in the immediate participation of the 
Deity in the affairs of men. 

By its theory, however, the newer history has upset both 
these positions. Yet, while shattering ancient belief in the 
subordination of mankind to the Deity and in some undefined 
end towards which all nations move, the newer history has not 
done as might have been expected of it. That is to say, it has 
not abandoned the study of the phenomena of power for the 
study of the causes which create power. Consequently, though 
it has displaced the theory of the older historians, it still follows 
their practice. Instead of men gifted with divine authority 
and moved directly by the will of God, the newer history puts 
forward men who are either heroes gifted with extraordinary, 
superhuman attributes or men of any and every degree who 
have happened to stand in authority over the masses. Instead 
of the old divinely-approved purposes of nations—of the Jews, 
the Greeks, ar the Romans—which bygone historians considered 
to be the purposes towards which all humanity moved, the 
newer history puts forward purposes of its own—purposes such 
as the welfare of the German, the French, or the English nations 
—or, in its highest flights, the welfare of all humanity (though 


424 


EPILOGUE 


by “humanity” it generally means only the few nations which 
occupy one small north-western corner of a great continent). 

Thus the newer history sets aside the views of the older 
science, yet has no new ones to set up in their place. Conse- 
quently the logic of the position of those historians who feign 
to have rejected the divine authority of rulers and ancient 
myths of that kind has inevitably compelled them to arrive 
by another route at the same end—namely, at a recognition 
of the facts (1) that nations are governed by individuals, and 
(2) that there exists a given end towards which all nations and 
humanity move. At the base of every work by these newer 
historians there lie (for all the seeming differences and novelty 
of standpoint of those works) two old-established and inevitable 
positions. In the first place, the historian describes the acts 
only of those particular individuals whom he considers to have 
exercised authority over humanity (one writer, for instance, 
regarding as such only monarchs, leaders of armies, and ministers, 
while another one adds to that list orators, scholars, reformers, 
philosophers, and poets), and in the second place, each historian 
has his own particular end towards which he considers humanity 
to have been, or to be, moving (one such writer, for instance, 
believing that end to have been the greatness of the Roman, 
the Spanish, and the French States, while another one considers 
it to have been the freedom, equality, and civilisation of one 
small corner of the world known as Europe). 

In 1789 a disturbance arose in Paris. It grew, developed, 
and found expression in a movement of nations from west to 
east. That movement took place more than once, and collided 
with a counter-movement westwards, until in 1812 it attained 
its ultimate goal—Moscow. Next, a strikingly similar return 
movement was carried out from east to west — a movement 
which, like the previous one, attracted to itself the nations of 
Central Europe. Finally this return movement reached its 
ultimate goal—Paris, and then gradually died away. During 
that period of twenty years an immense number of fields were 
left unploughed, countless homes destroyed, and an enormous 
volume of trade dissipated. Millions of people became destitute, 
sick, or exiles, and millions of Christians, professing the law of 
love for their neighbour, killed one another. 

What did it all mean? Whence did it arise? What moved 
those men to burn houses and to kill men like themselves? 
What were the first causes of those events? What was the 
force which compelled those men to act after such a fashion? 


425 


WAR AND PEACE 


Such are the involuntary, elementary, and wholly legitimate 
questions which humanity asks itself as it pores over the records 
and traditions of that bygone period of turmoil. For the 
decision of those questions serious human thought turns to the 
study of that history which has for its aim the self-realisation 
of nations and of humanity. 

If to this day history had continued to support the views of 
the older writers it would have answered: “The Deity, to 
reward or to punish His people, granted power to Napoleon, 
and directed him, through the exercise of the Divine Will, to 
the attainment of God-appointed ends:” which answer would 
have been a full and sufficient one enough. One might or 
might not have believed in the divine destiny of Napoleon, yet, 
for anyone who did believe in it, everything in the history of 
that period would at once have become intelligible and free 
from contradiction. Yet the newer history cannot answer us 
thus, seeing that science no longer recognises the views of the 
older writers concerning the immediate participation of the 
Deity in the affairs of men. Consequently it has to seek other 
answers to the above questions. 

In fact, the newer history answers something to this effect. 
“Do you desire to know what was the meaning of that move- 
ment of the nations—whence it arose, and what was the force 
which produced those phenomena? Listen to me, then. 
Louis XIV was a very proud and a very self-confident man. 
He had many mistresses and favourites, and ruled France badly. 
His successors likewise were weak men who ruled France badly 
and kept an equally large number of mistresses and favourites. 
At the same period certain men wrote certain books. Also, 
at the end of the eighteenth century there foregathered in.Paris 
a score of men who started to say that all men were equal and 
all men free. From this men went on, all over France, to 
cut one another's throats, and killed even their king. Now, 
at the same time there chanced also to be in France a man of 
genius—namely, Napoleon. Everywhere he got the upper hand 
ofeveryone. That is to say, everywhere he killed numbers of 
his fellows for the reason that he was a man of genius. For 
some unknown reason he set out to kill people in Africa, and 
did the work so well, and was so cunning and clever throughout, 
that, when he returned home to France, he was in a position 
to bid all men subject themselves to himself, and to ensure 
that they did so. Thus become emperor, he again set out to 
kill nations in Italy, Austria, and Prussia. There, too, he did 


426 


EPILOGUE 


his work well. In Russia, however, there was the Emperor 
Alexander, who decided to re-establish order in Europe, and 
joined issue with the man of geuius. Yet in 1807 he unex- 
pectedly made friends with Napoleon, and remained so until 
in 1811, the pair quarrelled again, and fell once more to killing 
their fellow-men. Then Napoleon brought 600,000 troops to 
Russia, and took Moscow. Next, he began a headlong flight 
from the city, and the Emperor Alexander, with the help of his 
advisers (Stein and others), united Europe in an expedition 
against the disturber of its peace. All Napoleon's allies suddenly 
turned against him, and it was to attack a Napoleon engaged 
in recruiting new forces that the expedition marched. The 
allies beat Napoleon, entered Paris, compelled the man of genius 
to renounce the throne, and sent him to the Isle of Elba— 
though without depriving him of all imperial dignity and 
respect, notwithstanding that, five years earlier, everyone had 
looked upon the ex-emperor as an outlawed brigand, and was 
to do the same again a year later. Next, Louis XVIII began 
his reign—a man at whom the French people, as well as the 
allies, had hitherto only laughed. Napoleon, after weeping in 
the presence of the Old Guard, renounced the throne, and went 
into exile. Next, some astute statesmen and diplomatists 
(chief among them Talleyrand, who had succeeded at the start 
in securing himself a good position, and used it to widen the 
boundaries of France) began a series of conferences in Vienna, 
and by those conferences to make nations happy or unhappy. 
Yet of a sudden both monarchs and diplomatists came near to 
quarrelling—came near to bidding their armies begin destroying 
one another once more. Before they could do so, however, 
Napoleon had landed in France with a following, and the French, 
though detesting him, once more submitted themselves to his 
influence. Theallied monarchs, enraged at this, again declared 
war against the French. This time the man of genius was 
beaten, and dispatched to the Island of St. Helena asa convicted 
brigand. There the exile, parted from all who were dear to him, 
and from his beloved France, died a lingering death on his 
rocky eyrie, and bequeathed the memory of his great deeds to 
posterity. Reaction set in in Europe, and the rulers resumed 
once more their accustomed role of brow-beating their subjects." 

It might almost be supposed that the above has been written 
as a joke on my part—that it represents a mere caricature of an 
historical exposition: yet, as a matter of fact, it represents no 
more than a mild example of the contradictory and irrelevant 


427 


WAR AND PEACE 


answers given us by all history—from general histories and the 
newer "histories of civilisation” of the period down to books 
of memoirs and histories of one particular nation only. The 
bizarrerie of those answers proceeds from the fact that the 
newer history is like a deaf man who persists in answering 
questions which no one has put to him. If the aim of history 
is the description of the movements of humanity and nations, 
then the first question—the lack of an answer to which would 
render all the rest unintelligible—should be: “What was the 
force which moved the nations to their acticn?” To that 
question the newer history answers with a rambling story, or 
else with some statement that Napoleon was a great genius, 
or that Louis XIV was very proud, or even that such and 
such a writer of the period happened to write such and such 
a book! i 

All that may very well be, and humanity is quite ready to 
accept the fact: yet it bears no relation whatever to the question 
which humanity has propounded. Moreover, it would only be 
interesting if we were to concede that some divine power, based 
upon itself and always acting alone, ruled nations either through 
Napoleons, through men like the French kings, or through 
writers. The existence of such a power, however, we no longer 
recognise, and consequently, before speaking of Napoleons, 
French kings, or writers, it is necessary to show that any con- 
nection existed between those personages and the national 
movements of their time. If, on the other hand, not divine 
power, but some other force, moved them, it should be explained 
what that new force was, seeing that that is the question in 
which lies the whole interest of history. History seems to 
suppose that the force in question was a self-explanatory one, 
and well-known to all. Yet, with every desire to recognise it 
as one familiar to the world at large, he who dips extensively 
into historical works will soon find himself doubting involun- 
tarily whether, in view of the differing representations of that 
force which he sees put forward by the historians themselves, 
it can really have been a force of which everyone is aware. 


428 


EPILOGUE 


CHAPTER CXLVIII 


Wuar, then, was the force which moved the nations? 

Writers of biographies and historians of individual peoples 
understand that force as a power pertaining only to supermen 
and rulers. According to them, events take place solely through 
the will of Napoleons, Alexanders, or, in general, all such 
personages as those of whom biographers treat. The answers 
which historians of this kind return to the question concerning 
the force by which events are inspired are satisfactory only 
so long as there is an historian for each separate event; but as 
soon as ever historians of different nationalities and views 
begin to describe the same occurrence, the answers given by 
them become meaningless, since not only do the conceptions 
of those writers with regard to the force in question differ, but 
frequently they contradict one another. One historian_will 
maintain that a given event took place through the will of 
Napoleon, while another one will assert that it took place 
through the will of Alexander, and a third that it did so through 
the will of yet another person. Moreover, historians of this 
kind contradict one another even in their explanations of the 
force upon which they assert the power of one and the same 
personage to have been based. For instance, Thiers, the 
Bonapartist writer, says that Napoleon’s power was based 
upon his genius and benevolence, whereas Lanfrey, the Repub- 
lican historian, avers that it was based upon his rascality and 
hoodwinking of the nation. Thus historians of this species, 
by mutually annihilating each other’s positions, annihilate also 
any definite idea of the force which produces events, and so 
return no answer to the essential question of history. 

General historians (i.e. those who treat of the affairs of all 
nations) seem to recognise the heterogeneity of these specialists 
in the matter of the force which produces events. They look 
upon that force, not as a power pertaining only to supermen 
and rulers, but as the result of several variously-directed forces. 
In describing the war-making or the conquest of a given nation, 
the general historian seeks the cause of a given event, not in 
the power of any one personage, but in the reaction upon one 
another of the numerous different personages who were con- 
nected with that event. According to this view, then, the 
power of historical personages is (apparently) the product of 
several different forces, and therefore not recognisable as a 


429 


WAR AND PEACE 


force which, in itself, produces events. Yet general historians 
almost invariably return to the idea that that power is one 
which does produce events, and that it stands to events in the 
relation of cause to effect. We find them saying in the same 
breath that an historical personage is the product of his own 
time, and that his power is the outcome of various forces, and 
that the campaign of 1812 and such other events as they dis- 
approve of were the outcome of Napoleon’s misdirected will— 
that, indeed, it was actually through his initiative that the 
ideas of 1789 were checked! Revolutionary ideas and the 
general situation produced Napoleon's power, yet that power 
stifled revolutionary ideas and the general situation! Yet 
this extraordinary contradiction is not which occurs merely 
now and again. On the contrary, we meet witb it at every 
step, while it is out of a consecutive series of such contradictions 
that the writings of all general historians are composed. In 
reality the absurdity arises out of the fact that, in entering upon 
the field of analysis, general historians only go half-way. 

To find out what are the constituent forces which are equiva- 
lent to an integral, a co-efficient, force it is necessary to make 
the sum of the constituent forces coincide with the integral 
force of which they form the component parts. This condition 
we never find observed by general historians. The result is that, 
to explain what the co-efficient force is, they are driven also to 
concede (to make good the deficiency of constituent forces) the 
existence of another and unexplained force which acts in 
accordance with the integral one. 

The specialist historian, in describing the campaign of 1813 
or the restoration of the Bourbons, declares that those events 
were produced by the will of Alexander. The general historian, 
however, refutes this view of the specialist writer, and seeks to 
show that the two events were due, not only to the will of 
Alexander, but also to the agency of Stein, Metternich, Madame 
de Staél, Talleyrand, Fichte, Chateaubriand, and others. 
Evidently, then, the general historian is dissolving Alexander 
into constituent portions represented by Talleyrand, Chateau- 
briand, and so forth. Yet the sum of those constituent por- 
tions, ie. the action upon one another of Chateaubriand, 
Talleyrand, Madame de Staél, and the rest—is not equal to the 
entire co-efficient, ie. to the phenomenon that millions of 
Frenchmen subjected themselves to the sway of the Bourbons. 
From the fact that Chateaubriand, Madame de Staél, and others 
spoke certain words to one another there can be deduced their 


430 


EPILOGUE 


personal relations only, and not the subjection of millions of 
human beings to a dynasty. Therefore, to explain how the 
relations of those personages brought about that subjection of 
millions, i.e. how a few constituent forces equal to a single one A 
produced an integral force equal to A multiplied a thousand 
times—the general historian finds himself obliged once more to 
admit the existence of the very force—namely, power—which 
hitherto he has denied, as well as to recognise it as the result ot 
other forces. That is to say, he has to concede some unex- 
plained force acting in accordance with the working of the whole. 
'This is what all general historians do: with the result that they 
not only contradict specialist historians, but likewise themselves. 

Country dwellers who are looking for rain or for fine weather, 
but who possess no clear idea as to the causes of rain, generally 
say: “The wind has driven away the clouds,” or, “The wind is 
driving up the clouds." So too with these general historians. 
Sometimes, if it suits their theory, they say that power is the 
result of events, while at other times, when they wish to prove 
something else, they say that power is the producer of events. 

A third class of historians—those known as the historians of 
civilisation, who follow a path first cut out for them by the 
general historians, but likewise recognise such persons as 
luterateurs and grandes dames as forces productive of events— 
understand the force of which we are speaking in a perfectly 
different manner, for it is in what we call culture or intellectual 
activity that they declare it to be discernible. 

Historians of civilisation are reasonable enough in thus 
following their progenitors the general historians; for if histori- 
cal events may be explained by saying that such and such people 
did such and such things to one another, why should not 
historical events also be explained by saying that such and such 
people wrote such and such books? From the infinite multi- 
tude of signs which accompany every phenomenon of life such 
historians select the sign of intellectual activity, and declare it 
to have been a cause. Yet, for all their efforts to show that the 
cause of a given event lies in intellectual activity, it is only by 
making great concessions that one can agree with the assertion 
that between intellectual activity and the movements of nations 
there can be anything in common, while it is a sheer impossibility 
to admit that intellectual activity has invariably directed the 
doings of mankind. Such phenomena as the brutal murders of 
the French Revolution (which were the result of harangues on 
the subject of the equality of man), as well as the cruel wars and 


431 


WAR AND PEACE 


massacres which have so frequently arisen out of the Gospel of 
Love, in no way bear out such an assertion. 

But even if we admit that all the cunningly devised pronounce- 
ments with which these histories are filled are trustworthy, and 
that nations are ruled by some indeterminate force called ideas, 
the essential question of history will either remain unanswered, 
or we shall be forced to add to the old power of monarchs and 
the old influence of councillors and other persons which the 
general historians have imported this same new force of ideas— 
the connection between which and the masses is not very 
apparent. One may understand that Napoleon had power, and 
that therefore a given event was accomplished. By making 
large concessions one may even understand that N apoleon, with 
other influences, was the cause of a given event. Yet how the 
book Le Contrat Social induced the French people to begin 
murdering one another is wholly unintelligible without some 
explanation of the causal connection between this new force of 
ideas and the event referred to. 

Undoubtedly there exists a connection between all persons 
living at the same period, and therefore also a possibility. of 
discovering some connection between the intellectual activity 
of mankind and historical movements, just as a connection is 
certainly traceable between the movements of humanity and 
trade, handicrafts, agriculture, and other pursuits. Yet how 
the intellectual activity of mankind can appear to historians of 
civilisation the cause or the expression of all historical move- 
ments it is difficult to understand. Historians can only have 
reached such a conclusion through supposing—(1) That, inas- 
much as history is written by scholars, it is a natural and pleasant 
thing for the latter to imagine that the activity of their own 
profession is responsible for the movements of all humanity 
just as it might be a natural and pleasant thing for merchants, 
agriculturists, or soldiers—I do not say this merely because such 
men do not write history—to imagine the same thing; and (2) 
That all mental activity, enlightenment, civilisation, and ideas 
are obscure and indeterminate conceptions under cover of 
which it is easy to use words even more obscure, and so to 
bolster up any theory at will. 

Nevertheless, without speaking of the internal merits of this 
species of history (it may be that it has a purpose of some sort 
and is necessary to someone), historians of civilisation (to whose 
productions general histories are beginning more and more to 
assimilate themselves) are remarkable for the fact that in 


432 


EPILOGUE 


examining seriously and in detail the religious, philosophical, 
and political ideas of the time as the causes of events, each time 
that they have to describe an actual historical happening, such 
as the campaign of 1812, they involuntarily describe it as the 
result of power, stating directly that this campaign resulted 
from the will of Napoleon. In thus speaking, these historians 
of civilisation insensibly contradict themselves by showing both 
that the new force which they have invented does not express 
historical events and that the only means which enables us to 
understand history is the force to which they deny recognition. 


CHAPTER CXLIX 


LET us suppose a locomotive to be in motion. To the question 
“How does it move?” one peasant might reply that a devil 
was pushing it along, a second one declare that it moved because 
its wheels revolved, and a third one state it as his opinion that 
the cause of the locomotive’s movement lay in the trail of smoke 
which he saw blown backwards by the wind. The first peasant 
would be irrefutable—or, at all events, to refute him it would 
be necessary either to convince him that devils do not exist or 
for some other peasant to tell him that a mechanic, not a devil 
was pushing the locomotive along. Only then would they both 
of them see, from their mutual contradictions, that both of them 
were wrong. The peasant, however, who should say that the 
cause of the movement was the revolving of the wheels of the 
locomotive would refute himself, since, once he had entered 
upon the ground of analysis, he would be forced to go further 
and further, until at length he had explained the actual cause of 
the wheels themselves revolving; nor, until he had arrived at the 
ultimate agency of all—namely, the steam compressed in the 
boiler—would he have the right to desist from his investigations. 
As for the peasant who should explain the movement of the 
locomotive by the fact of the wind blowing the smoke backwards, 
he would be one who, having noticed that the explanation 
regarding the wheels did not furnish the true case, fastened upon 
the first external sign which occurred to him, and gave it as his 
explanation of the phenomenon. —— j 

In reality, the only conception which could explain the move- 
ment of a locomotive is the conception of a force equal to the 
whole movement visible. Similarly, the only conception which 


433 


WAR AND PEACE 


could explain the movements of nations is the conception of a 
force equal to the sum of those movements. Yet to different 
historians such a conception connotes entirely different forces 
—forces not equal to the movements visible. Some historians 
discern behind those movements a force strictly pertaining to 
supermen, even as the first peasant saw in the locomotive a 
devil. Others of them see a force proceeding from other forces, 
like the wheels of the locomotive. Others, again, see the 
influence of intellectual activity, like the trail of smoke pouring 
from the funnel. 

As long as histories are written of individuals only— of Ceesars, 
Alexanders, Luthers, Voltaires, and so forth—who have taken 
part in given events, and not histories of all persons without 
exception who have participated in them, no description of the 
movements of humanity will be possible without the conception 
of some such force as compels men to direct their activities to 
a common end. The only conception of this kind known to 
historians is the idea of power. This conception is the one 
handle which can regulate the material of history as now 
expounded, and the historian who would strip off that handle 
without first of all devising scme other means of dealing with 
historical material would deprive himself of the last possible 
means of coping with its intricacies. The imperative necessity 
of this idea of power for explaining historical phenomena is 
best illustrated by the general historians and historians of 
civilisation themselves—by the writers who pretend to deny 
the idea of power, yet employ it at every step. 

Hitherto historical science, in its relation to the questions of 
humanity, has been like monetary currency—like bank-notes 
and coin. Biographical histories and histories of a single 
nation resemble the former. They may pass and circulate 
everywhere without doing harm, and even to advantage, so 
long as there does not arise the question of the guarantee upon 
which they are secured. Similarly, so long as one overlooks 
the question of how the will of supermen produces events, 
histories by such writers as M. Thiers will be found both interest- 
ing and instructive, as well as charged with a certain tinge of 
poetry. Yet, even as a doubt concerning the effective value of 
bank-notes may arise, either from the fact that they are so easy 
to make that many people may begin making them, or from 
the fact that one may come to prefer gold to notes, so a doubt 
concerning the effective value of histories of this kind may 
arise either from the fact that there seems to be so many of them 


434 


EPILOGUE 


or from the fact that one may take to asking, in the simplicity 
of one’s heart—“ Yet what force enabled Napoleon to do so-and- 
so ?”’—that is one may desire to exchange current paper money 
for the pure gold of a working idea. 

On the other hand, general historians and historians of civili- 
sation resemble persons who, recognising the disadvantages of 
bank-notes, decide to mint currency of a less durable metal 
than gold—currency which is metal, certainly, but no more. 
Paper money may always deceive the unwary, but metal coin— 
especially of debased metal—deceives no one. Even as gold is 
gold only so long as it is employable, not merely for exchange, 
but for the transaction of commerce, so general historians will 
rank as gold only when they are able to answer the essential 
question of history—namely, “What is power?” At present 
they answer it only with contradictions, while the historians of 
civilisation put it altogether aside, and answer some other 
question. Even, also, as tokens similar to gold can be circulated 
only among business men who have agreed to recognise them as 
gold or among people who do not know the true properties of 
gold, so the general historians and historians of civilisation, in 
returning no answers to the essential questions of humanity, 
serve, for ends of their own, as mere current coin for universities 
and the reading public—for those who run after what they term 
“serious” books. 


CHAPTER CL 


Havinc set aside the views of the older historians as to the 
divine subordination of a nation’s will to one chosen individual 
and the subordination of that individual to God, history cannot 
take a single step forward without contradicting itself—without 
having to choose between two things: either that it shall return 
to the old belief in the immediate participation of the Deity in 
the affairs of men, or that it shall define exactly the meaning of 
the force which produces historical events and is called power. 
To return to the old belief is impossible, since it lies shattered. 
Therefore it remains only to explain the meaning of power. 
“Napoleon ordered troops to be mustered and to make war.” 
This assertion has become so habitual with us, so entirely the 
view with which we have identified ourselves, that the question 
of why 600,000 men should have gone to war exactly when. 


435 


WAR AND PEACE 


Napoleon uttered certain words appears to us absurd. He 
possessed power, and therefore what he commanded to be done 
was done. Such an answer would be satisfactory enough if we 
really believed that bis power was given him of God, but, inas- 
much as we believe that no longer, it becomes necessary to 
determine exactly what that power was which this one man 
exerted over his fellows. It cannot have been the direct power 
possessed by a physically stronger being over a weaker one—the 
power which is founded upon the exercise, or the threatened 
exercise, of physical force, such as the strength of Hercules. 
Likewise it cannot have been the power which is founded upon 
the possession of moral force (as certain historians assert, in 
the innocence of their souls, when they declare that all historical 
personages are cast in heroic mould—are men gifted with extra- 
ordinary strength of mind, intellect, and what we call genius), 
seeing that, apart from men of heroic stamp like Napoleon— 
men concerning whose moral qualities opinion is much divided— 
history shows us that even men such as Louis XIV or Metternich, 
who governed millions of their fellows, were remarkable for no 
special degree of mental vigour, but, on the contrary, were 
usually weaker than any of the many whom they ruled. If the 
source of power lies, not in the physical, or in the moral qualities 
of the individual who possesses it, clearly that source must be 
external to the individual, and lie, rather, in the relation of 
the individual to the masses. 

A similar view of power is taken by the-science of law—the 
bureau d'échange of history, where the historical theory of 
power purports to be changeable for pure gold. Power, says 
that science, is the joint will of the masses, conferred, with their 
tacit or expressed consent, upon the rulers whom the masses 
may select. In so far as the science of law is concerned—the 
science which connotes judgments passed for the ordering of 
a state and power, all this would be clear enough if matters 
could always be ordered on similar lines; but, in applying such 
a definition as the above to history, further explanation is 
required. The science of law looks upon a state and power in 
much the same way that the ancients used to look upon fire— 
namely, as something absolutely existing; but in the eyes of 
history a state and power represent merely phenomena, just as, 
in the eyes of the natural physicist of the present day, fire also 
represents a phenomenon, and not an element. 

From this fundamental difference of view between history 
and the science of law there arises the fact that the latter ean 


436 


EPILOGUE 


lay down in detail what it considers to be the best method of 
organising power, and what it considers that power to be which 
is irremovable and independent of time, but can return no 
answer to history’s question as to what that power is which 
changes and is dependent upon time. If power is the joint will 
of a people imposed upon its ruler, did Pugachev + truly repre- 
sent the will of the masses? And if not, why did Napoleon do 
so? Why, again, was Napoleon III, when taken at Boulogne, 
a criminal, and why, later on, were those persons whom he, in 
his turn captured, criminals? When révolutions de palais occur 
(which are usually affairs in which some two or more persons 
are concerned), is the will of the masses transferred to the new 
ruler? In international relations, is the will of a nation trans- 
ferred to that nation’s conqueror? Was the will of the Rhenish 
Bund transferred to Napoleon in 1808? Was the will of the 
Russian nation transferred to him in 1809 when our troops 
marched with the French against the Austrians? We find 
these questions answered in three different ways. 

Firstly, it is said that the will of the masses has always been 
delegated unconditionally to the ruler or rulers whom the 
masses have chosen, and that every rise, therefore, of a new 
power, every struggle against the power once granted, is to be 
regarded as an infringement of the true power. Secondly, it is 
said that the will of the masses has always been delegated to 
their rulers conditionally, i.e. on fixed and limited terms; after 
which it is shown that all restrictions upon, collisions with, or 
annulments of that power have arisen out of non-observance 
by the rulers aforesaid of the terms on which they received it. 
Third!y, it is said that the will of the masses has always been 
delegated to their rulers conditionally, but on terms which are 
not wholly clear and definite to us, and that the rise of one or 
more other powers in the state, their struggles, and their fall 
have proceeded from over-lax or over-strict fulfilment of the 
unknown terms on which the original rulers received their 
power. 

In these three ways do historians of this kind explain the 
relations of peoples to their rulers. Those who adopt the first 
view, being too simple-minded to understand the question of 
the meaning of power (they are those local and biographical 
historians to whom I have already referred), speak as though 
the joint will of the masses were delegated to historical person- 
ages unconditionally: wherefore, in describing a given power, 

1 Leader of a Cossack rebellion during the reign of Catherine the Great. 


437 


WAR AND PEACE 


they appear to suppose that it was the only real and absolute 
one, and that every force opposing it was not a power at all, but 
only an infringement of, or assault upon, the true one. This 
theory of theirs, though convenient for dealing with primitive, 
peaceful periods of history, has this disadvantage in its applica- 
tion to those complex and stormy periods in the lives of nations 
when several powers usually arise simultaneously and come 
into collision with one another—that, while the legitimist 
historian will assert that the Convention, the Directory, and 
Bonaparte were all of them mere infringements of power, 
Republican and Bonapartist historians will assert—the former 
that the Convention, and the latter that the Empire, was the 
true power, and that everything else was so much infringement 
of power. This makes it clear that their mutual contradictions 
render these historians’ explanation of power fit only for children 
of the tenderest years. i 

While recognising the falsity of this view of history, the 
historians who adopt the second of the above views state that 
power is based upon conditional imposition of the joint will of 
the masses upon their rulers, and that historical personages 
hold their power only on condition that they carry out the 
programme tacitly and unanimously assigned to them by the 
will of the people. Yet what that programme consists of these 
historians do not say—or, if they dc so, they contradict one 
another continually. According to his particular view of what 
constitutes the aim of the movements of a nation, each such 
historian sees in the programme in question either the greatness, 
the enrichment, the emancipation, or the enlightenment of the 
citizens of France or of this, that, or the other state. Yet, 
passing over the mutual contradictions of these historians as 
to the scope of that programme, and even admitting that there 
can exist a programme common to all of them, we still see that 
historical facts almost invariably controvert such a theory. If 
the terms on which power is delegated mean the enrichment, the 
emancipation, or the enlightenment of a nation, why did men 
like Louis XIV and Ivan IV live out their reigns in peace, 
while others, like Louis XVI and Charles I, paid a penalty to 
their people? To this question such historians reply that the 
policy of Louis XIV—which was contrary to the programme— 
was visited upon Louis XVI. But why was it not visited upon 
Louis XIV and Louis XV? Why was it visited upon Louis XVI 
in particular? And what was the period uf that visitation? 
To these questions no answer can be returned. Equally impos- 


438 


EPILOGUE 


sible is it to explain—if we adopt the view under discussion— 
the fact that the joint will of a people was delegated for centuries 
to certain rulers and their successors, and then suddenly trans- 
ferred, by turns and during a space of fifty years, to a Conven- 
tion, a Directory, to a Napoleon, to an Alexander, to a 
Louis XVIII, again to Napoleon, to a Charles X, to a Louis 
Philippe, to a republican government, and to a Napoleon III. 
In explaining these swift transferences of the popular will from 
one rule to another, and especially in the matter of international 
relations, conquests, and alliances, these historians involuntarily 
have to confess that some of those phenomena were not regular 
transferences of will, but accidents dependent upon the in- 
trigues, errors, stratagems, or weaknesses of a diplomatist, a 
monarch, or a leader of a party. Consequently, most of the 
phenomena of history, such as civil wars, insurrections, and 
conquests, appear to such historians as resulting, not from 
transference of the free will of a people, but from the ill-directed 
will of one or two individuals. That is to say, they resulted 
from infringements of power. Consequently, also, all historical 
events appear to writers of this kind divergences from theory. 
The historians who adopt the third of the above views say that 
the will of the masses is delegated to historical personages con- 
ditionally, but on terms which are not known to us, and that 
historical personages hold their power only so long as they fulfil 
the will imposed upon them. Yet, even if that be so, and if 
the force which moves nations lies, not in historical personages, 
but in nations themselves, wherein consists the importance of 
those same historical personages? Such personages (answer 
historians of this kind) only express the will of the masses. 
That is to say, their activity serves but to represent the activity 
of the masses. Yet, even if that be so, the question again 
arises: Does all the activity of historical personages serve as 
an expression of the will of the masses, or only a given side of 
that activity? If all the activity of historical personages serves 
as an expression of the will of the masses (as some of these 
historians suppose), then the biographies of the Napoleons and 
Catherines, with their multitudinous details of court scandal, 
serve also as an expression of the lives of their respective nations 
—which is manifestly absurd. If, on the other hand, only one 
side of the activity of historical personages serves as an expres- 
sion of the life of nations (as others of such pseudo-philosopher- 
historians suppose), then, to define which side of the activity of 
an historical personage expresses the life of his or her nation, we 


439 


WAR AND PEACE 


must first of all know wherein the life of that nation consisted. 
Confronted with this difficulty, historians of the kind Iam speak- 
ing of invent an abstraction of the most obscure, impalpable and 
general species possible—an abstraction which may serve to cover 
the greatest number of events, and say that that invention of theirs 
contains within it the end of the movements of humanity. The 
general abstractions most commonly adopted by these historians 
are freedom, equality, enlightenment, progress, civilisation, and 
culture. Having thus postulated an abstraction as the aim of 
the movements of humanity, these historians go on to study 
those personages in history who have left the greatest number 
of memorials behind them (such as, for instance, monarchs, 
ministers, military commanders, authors, reformers, priests, 
and journalists), but only in proportion as they consider those 
persons to have contributed to, or to have hindered, the abstrac- 
tion in question. Yet, inasmuch as nothing has ever yet shown 
that the aim of humanity lies in freedom, in equality, in 
enlightenment, or in civilisation, and inasmuch, also, as the 
connection of the masses with the rulers and enlighteners of 
humanity is based only upon an arbitrary supposition that the 
joint will of the masses is always delegated to the personages 
who are most prominent in history, it follows that the activity 
of millions who emigrate, fire their houses, abandon agriculture, 
and exterminate one another will find no expression in a 
description given of the activity of a score or so of persons who 
do not fire their houses or kill their fellow-men. History proves 
this at every step. Can the wanderings of the nations of the 
west at the end of the last century and their drift towards the 
east be attributed only to the doings of Louis XIV and his two 
immediate successors, or to the vagaries of their ministers and 
favourites, or to the lives of Napoleon, Rousseau, Diderot, 
Beaumarchais, and others? Can the movement of the Russian 
nation eastwards towards Kazan and Siberia be expressed in 
mere details concerning the diseased character of Ivan IV and 
his correspondence with Kurbski? Can the movements of 
humanity during the epoch of the crusades be attributed solely 
to the life and doings of the Gottfrieds and the Louis and their 
ladies? Even so, we still remain unable to understand the 
movement of nations from west to east—the movement which 
began with no aim in particular and no leader, but was carried 
out at first by a mere band of vagrants headed by Peter the 
Hermit. Still less can we understand the cessation of that 
movement at the very moment when the preconceived, sacred 


440 


EPILOGUE 


aim of the expeditions had been proclaimed by the chief 
historical personages concerned—namely, the freeing of Jeru- 
salem. Popes, kings, and knights strove with might and main 
to stir up the people to the rescue of the Holy Land, but the 
people would not move for the reason that the unknown cause 
which had set them in motion before no longer existed. Thus 
it is clear that a history of mere Gottfrieds and Minnesingers 
cannot comprise a history of the lives of nations, and that a 
history of Gottfrieds and Minnesingers will remain a history of 
Gottfrieds and Minnesingers and no more, while a history of the 
lives of nations and of their impulses has yet to be written. 

As for the histories of writers and reformers, they do even less 
to elucidate the lives of nations. True, histories of civilisation 
explain the impulses and conditions of the life of a given writer 
or reformer. For instance, we learn from them that Luther had 
an irascible temper, and that he delivered such and such orations, 
as also that Rousseau was of a suspicious nature, and that he 
wrote such and such books. What we do not learn from them 
is why (for instance) the nations flew at one another’s throats 
after the Reformation, nor why men slew one another during 
the French Revolution. 

Even if the two sorts of history be combined (as is done by 
some of the newer historians), they form only histories of 
monarchs and writers, not a history of the lives of nations. 


CHAPTER CLI 


Tue lives of nations could not be comprised in the lives of the 
individuals named above, for the reason that the connection 
between those individuals and their respective nations has 
never been defined. The theory that such a connection exists 
and is based upon the delegation of the general will to historical 
personages is altogether hypothetical, and in no way borne out 
by the experience of history. Possibly the theory elucidates a 
good deal in so far as the science of law is concerned, and is 
necessary for some purpose or another, but, in applying it to 
history, it becomes meaningless so soon as ever we are con- 
fronted with revolutions, conquests, and civil wars—in fact, so 
soon as ever history begins. The reason why the theory seems 
irrefutable is that the act of delegation of the popular will can 
never be proved, seeing that it never takes place. Yet, no 


441 


WAR AND PEACE 


matter what event takes place, nor who directs it, the theory 
can always say that such and such a person was in supreme 
direction because to him there had been delegated the joint will 
of the masses. 

Thus the answers returned by this theory to the questions of 
history are like the answers of a man who, looking upon a flock 
of sheep as it roams over a pasture, and leaving out of account 
both the relative richness of the herbage in different spots and 
the driving of the shepherd, considers the cause of this or that 
direction taken by the flock to be due to the fact that a parti- 
cular animal is heading the rest. “The sheep move in such and 
such a direction because their leader guides them thither, and 
because to that leader has been delegated the joint will of the 
flock.” That is what the first of our classes of historians answer 
—the class of those who support the theory of unconditional 
transference of will. “If the sheep at the head of the flock 
keep on replacing one another, the fact is due to the circumstance 
that the joint will of the rest keeps being transferred from one 
leader to another, according as the leader does or does not lead 
them whither they desire to go." That is what those historians 
answer who assert that the joint will of the masses is delegated 
to their rulers on terms which they (the historians) regard as 
indeterminate. This is a point of view which often causes the 
observer to bolster up the particular theory which he has 
adopted by recognising as leaders those who have not reached 
the front at all when the masses change direction, but are still 
on the flanks, or even in the rear. “If we see that both the 
leaders and the direction of the flock are constantly being 
changed, the fact is due to the circumstance that, to attain a 
given direction, the rest of the animals keep delegating their 
will to those of their number whose movements strike most upon 
the eye. Consequently, to study the movements of the flock as 
a whole, we must watch the animals thus most prominent to 
our sight, no matter from what quarter of the flock they come.” 
That is what the historians of the third species answer—the 
historians who recognise as expressions of a given peniod all 
historical personages, from monarchs to journalists. 

The theory of the will of a nation being expressed by its 
historical personages is only a periphrasis—putting the same 
question in other words. 

What is the cause of historical events? Power. What is 
power? Power is the sum total of will as expressed by one 
person. On what conditions are the wills of the masses expressed 


442 


EPILOGUE 


by one person? On the condition of this one person expressing 
the wills of the masses. In other words power is power, and 
power is the word the meaning of which we want to know. 

If the province of human knowledge were limited to abstract 
thought only, humanity, in criticising the explanation of power 
given by science, would conclude that power is only a verbal 
expression, and possessed of no actual existence. Yet, for 
the comprehension of phenomena, man has not only abstract 
thought, but also the weapon of experience, at his disposal 
when testing the results of such thought; and experience tells 
him that power is not a verbal expression only, but a phenomenon 
actually existent. Without mentioning the fact that, without 
the idea of power, no description of the joint activities of men 
would ever be possible, the existence of power is proved both 
by history and by observation of contemporary events. 

Whenever an historical event occurs, one or more persons 
make their appearance in accordance with whose will the event 
seems to happen. Napoleon III issued an order, and the 
French went to Mexico. The Prussian king and Bismarck 
issued orders, and their troops went to Bohemia. Napoleon I 
issued an order, and his troops went to Russia. Alexander 
issued an order, and the French made submission to the Bour- 
bons. Thus experience teaches us that every historical event 
is bound up with the will of one or more persons who issue 
orders. Some historians are led by their old habit of recognising 
divine participation in the affairs of humanity to attempt to 
see the cause of each such event in an expression of the will of an 
individual invested with power, but this conclusion is upheld 
neither by reason nor by experience. On the other hand, reason 
shows us that expressions of the will of an individual—his 
actual words—are only part of the general activity expressed 
in such an event as a war or a revolution: wherefore, unless 
we recognise some incomprehensible, supernatural force—some 
miracle, in fact, it is impossible to admit that words can be the 
immediate cause of the movements of millions, while, on the 
other hand, even supposing that words can be the cause of 
events, history shows us that expressions of the will of historical 
personages have seldom resulted in action, i.e., that frequently 
the commands of such personages are not only left unexecuted, 
but produce an effect precisely contrary to the one intended. 
Consequently, unless we admit that the Deity participates in 
the atfairs of humanity, we cannot assume power to be the 
cause of events. Power, viewed from the standpoint cf 


443 


WAR AND PEACE 


experience, is merely a link between the expression of the will 
of a given individual and the fulfilment of that will by otne: 
individuals. In order, therefore, to explain to ourselves the 
conditions under which it is so, we must first of all establish the 
idea that expressions of will emanate always from men and not 
from the Deity. If it were the Deity who issued commands, 
who expressed His will (as history written by the older school 
assures us), the expression of that will could never be dependent 
upon time nor evoked by temporal things, seeing that God is in 
no way bound up with earthly occurrences. Yet, in speaking 
of commands, i.e., of expressions of will—emanating from men, 
the fact that the latter are dependent upon time and closely 
bound up with one another obliges us to explain the connection 
between their commands and historical events by postulating: 
(r) That one inevitable condition must always be that both 
those events and the individual who commands them to occur 
move in time;? and (2) That there must always be a certain 
connection between the individual and the agents who fulfil 
his commands. 


CHAPTER CLII 


ONLv to an expression of the will of the Deity (who is 
independent of time) can a series of events covering several 
years or centuries be attributed, and only to the Deity (who is 
stirred to action by no temporal agency) does it belong to direct, 
by His will alone, a movement of humanity. Man is subject to 
time, as well as himself a participator in historical events. 

In establishing the first condition conceded above— the con- 
dition of human dependence upon time—we see that no single 
command can ever be fulfilled without a previous command 
having been given which makes feasible the fulfilment of the 
second. No command ever appears spontaneously, nor includes 
within its scope a whole series of events, but, on the contrary, 
always arises out of another one, and so far from referring to a 
series of occurrences, refers always to a single moment in a 
single occurrence. When, for example, we say that Napoleon 
commanded his troops to go to war, we combine under a single 
command a series of subsequent commands—all of them 
dependent upon one another. It did not lie in Napoleon's 
power to order the expedition to Russia, and he did not do-so. 


1 i.e., are limited by the circumstances and conditions of time, 


444 


EPILOGUE 


What happened was that one day he ordered certain documents 
to be dispatched to Vienna, Berlin, and St. Petersburg, while the 
following day saw issued decrees, orders to the army, the fleet, 
the subsidiary corps, and so forth. All these millions of orders 
went to make up a series of commands which corresponded to a 
sereis of events such as finally landed the French troops in Russia. 
On the other hand, the fact that, although, throughout his 
reign, Napoleon kept issuing orders for an expedition to be 
carried out against England (and spent upon no single other 
enterprise so much time and effort as he did upon this one), he 
never once attempted to execute his intention, but, instead, 
undertook an expedition against Russia (with whom he had 
often said that he wished to remain at peace), arose out of the 
circumstance that his earlier commands did not correspond to 
the sequence of events, whereas his later ones did. 

For a command to be faithfully fulfilled it must be a command 
actually capable of fulfilment. To know always what com- 
mands can be fulfilled and what cannot is impossible, not only in 
the case of a Napoleonic expedition against Russia (an event 
in which millions participated), but even in the case of the 
simplest of operations, seeing that both the one and the other 
are liable at any moment to find themselves confronted with 
millions of obstacles. Every command fulfilled is invariably 
one of an immense number of commands unfulfilled. The im- 
possible commands have no connection with the event concerned, 
and so remain unexecuted. Only the possible ones become 
linked into a consecutive series of commands corresponding to 
a consecutive series of events, and so come to be executed. 

Our erroneous idea that any command which precedes an 
event is the cause of that event arises out of the fact that, 
when an event has occurred, and only those few (out of, per- 
haps, a thousand) commands have been fulfilled which were 
connected with the event in question, we forget all about the 
commands left unfulfilled for the reason that their fulfilment 
was impossible. Another chief source of error in this regard 
lies in the fact that, in an historical exposition, a countless 
series of different petty events (such as, for instance, the many 
entailed upon Russia by the French war) may become generalised 
into a single event, according to the result produced by that 
series of events, and that the series of commands which cor- 
responded to those various petty occurrences may likewise 
become generalised into a single expression of will. We say, for 
example, that Napoleon conceived and carried out the expedition 


445 


WAR AND PEACE 


against Russia. Yet, as a matter of fact, nothing is to be found 
in the whole of his career which in any way resembles such an 
expression of will. What we find, rather, is a series of com- 
mands (i.e., expressions of his will) of the most varied and 
indefinite tenor possible, and that from that countless series of 
expressions of will it is customary to select such of his fulfilled 
commands as led up to the expedition of 1812: the reason for 
this being, not that his fulfilled commands were in any way 
different to his unfulfilled, but that, as a series, they chanced to 
coincide with the series of events which finally brought the 
French troops to Russia. As when in stencilling this or that 
figure appears, it is not because paint is put on in any particular 
way, but because it was smeared on from any direction on the 
figure cut out in the stencil. 

Thus, according as we observe the relation of time between 
commands and events, we see that, although a command can 
never be the immediate cause of an event, there nevertheless 
exists between the two a certain definite interdependence. To 
understand wherein that interdependence consists we must 
establish also the second of our two conditions 1 governing every 
command which emanates from man and not from God— 
namely, the condition that every individual issuing commands 
must also be a participator in events. It is precisely this 
relation of an individual who issues commands to those who 
execute them that constitutes what we call power. Let me 
explain this. 

For the purpose of common action, men always unite in 
combinations in which, whatsoever the aim of their joint action, 
the relation between the various individuals participating in the 
movement is always the same. This relation is such as to bring 
it about that the largest number of members of the combination 
take the largest direct part, and the smallest number of members 
the smallest direct part, in the common action for which they 
have all of them combined together. Of such combinations, 
one of the most typical and clearly defined is an army. 

An army is made up of a large number of men of the lowest 
military rank (private soldiers), as well as of a smaller number 
of men (non-commissioned officers) immediately above them, 
a still smaller number of men (commissioned officers) above the 
last-named, and a single individual at the head of all. Thus 
military organisation might be likened to a cone having for its 
base the private soldiers, and for its apex the commander-in- 


1 See page 444. 


446 


EPILOGUE 


chief. The private soldier does the immediate work of pillaging, 
killing, burning, and robbing, and for the execution of all those 
acts he receives commands from his superior officers, while 
he himself never issues a command. The non-commissioned 
officers do less of the immediate work of war than the private 
soldiers, since their number is smaller, but they sometimes issue 
commands. The commissioned officers, again, do even less of 
the immediate work than the non-commissioned officers, but 
issue commands more frequently. Lastly, the commander-in- 
chief bids the troops go to war, and appoints them their goal, 
but seldom or never uses his personal weapons. Thus the head 
of an army never takes a direct part in the actual work of war, 
but only makes general dispositions for the movements of the 
masses under him. The same relation obtains in every com- 
bination formed by men for joint action—whether in agriculture, 
trade, or any kind of government or administration. Thus, 
without drawing arbitrary distinctions between the various 
component parts of the cone—between the ranks of an army, 
or between the various positions and grades of members of any 
sort of administration or public body, a law results through 
which men always seek to accomplish action in common by 
uniting in such a relation among themselves that, the more 
directly certain of their members participate in the accomplish- 
ment of that action, the less are they permitted to issue com- 
mands and the greater is their number, while, the less certain 
others of their members participate in the common action, the 
more are they permitted to issue commands and the smaller is 
their number; until at length we arrive at a single individual 
who, taking the smallest direct part of all in the work, directs 
that work more than is the case with any other member, through 
the commands which he issues. This relation between com- 
mander and commanded is what constitutes the essence of the 
conception which we call power. 

Thus, in establishing the condition of time under which all 
events must take place we have found that commands are ful- 
filled only when they refer to a corresponding series of events. 
Also, in establishing the condition of an inevitable connection 
between the commander and those whom he commands, we 
have found that every commander is bound by his very office to 
take the smallest direct part in events—to confine his activity 
exclusively to commanding. 


447 


WAR AND PEACE 


CHAPTER CLIII 


WHENEVER an event is taking place, men always express their 
ideas and aspirations with regard to it; and inasmuch as the 
event always arises out of the joint activity of several persons, 
one of such expressed ideas or aspirations is sure to be fulfilled, 
or approximately so. When, therefore, an idea has been 
expressed and becomes realised, it also becomes connected 
with the event in the guise of an antecedent command. 

Let us suppose a number of men drawing a beam of wood 
along the ground. Each of them may be expressing his ideas 
as to the best method of doing so and the proper destination 
of the beam, yet it will generally be seen that they are performing 
their task at the bidding of another person—of a person who. 
is issuing commands. There we have commands and power 
in their simplest form. The man who does the most labour 
with his hands has the least time to think of what he is doing, 
or to foresee what will come of the common action, or to issue 
commands. On the other hand, the man who is issuing the 
greatest number of commands is obviously the least able of the 
party to perform direct labour with his hands. 

In a large aggregate of men directing their efforts to a 
common end, those of them stand out the most prominenily 
who do the smallest amount of manual work and most confine 
their activity to the issuing of commands. When a man is 
acting alone he keeps always before him a stock of ideas which 
he believes to have regulated his action in the past, to be a 
justification for his action in the present, and to present a basis 
for his action in the future. In the same way, aggregates of 
men entrust certain of their number with the task of conceiving 
ideas both to justify their joint action in the present and to 
serve as a basis for similar action in the future. Certain known 
or unknown causes once led the French people to fall to cutting 
one another's throats, while at the same time they justified 
themselves by saying that it was necessary to do so for the 
welfare of France and the furtherance of freedom and equality. 
When at length they desisted from killing one another, they 
again justified themselves on the ground of the necessity of 
uniting their forces against Europe. Next, they carried out 
a movement eastwards for the purpose of killing fresh numbers 
of their fellow-men, and on that occasion again they found their 
justification in talk about the glory of France and the perfidy 


448 


EPILOGUE 


of England. Yet history shows us that these various justifica- 
tions had no significance in common whatever, but, on the 
contrary, only contradicted one another. Instances of this 
are to be seen in the statements that the murder of man was 
necessary for the recognition of his rights, and that the slaughter 
of millions of people in Russia was necessary for the humbling 
of England. Yet, as viewed in the light of to-day, those justi- 
fications have an important bearing. They relieved the men 
who committed those acts of moral responsibility. Those 
temporary pretexts were like the bundles of broom which one 
sometimes sees tied to the front of a locomotive to sweep the 
rails. They swept those men’s road clear of all moral responsi- 
bility. Without such justifications we could never explain the 
exceedingly simple question which confronts us in our study of 
historical events, namely, “How do millions of men come to 
accomplish joint crimes such as wars, massacres, and so forth?” 
In view of the fixed and complex forms of state and public 
life in Europe, is it conceivable that an historical event should 
not be ordained and brought about by the word of a monarch, 
a minister, a parliament, or a journal? And could any joint 
action, no matter what, not find justification for itself on 
the ground of state unity, nationality, the equilibrium of 
Europe, or civilisation? Every event taking place is bound 
to coincide with some desire which has been previously ex- 
pressed, until, justifying itself on one pretext and another, 
it comes to appear the product of the will of one or more 
individuals. The prow of a ship always drives a billow of foam 
before it, and to those on board the ship that billow alone, and 
not the ship, seems, at first, to be moving. Yet, if they 
watch the billow closely and point by point, and compare its 
movement with the movement of the ship, they soon come to 
realise that each stage of the billow’s progress is determined 
by the progress of the vessel, and that they were mistaken in 
taking no account of the ship’s agency. The same thing is 
apparent as, stage by stage, we follow the progress of historical 
personages, i.e. as we gradually verify the inevitable condition 
that every event moves continuously through time, and also 
keep in mind the condition that there always exists a connection 
between historical personages and the masses. Whatsoever 
events may occur, they always seem to have been foreseen and 
fore-ordained, just as, no matter in what direction a ship be 
sailing, there always surges before its bows a billow which in 
no way aids its progress, yet appears, at first sight, to be moving 


449 


WAR AND PEACE 


spontaneously, and even to be directing the movement of the 
ship. 


In looking only to those expressions of will on the part of 
historical personages which have borne some relation to historical 
events, as commands, historians have supposed that events 
depend upon commands. Yet, in observing eve ts and the 
connection always existent between historical pers nages and 
the masses, we have found that such personages and their 
commands depend upon events. Undoubted proof of this lies 
in the fact that, no matter what commands be issued, no 
historical event can take place unless there be other reasons 
also for its happening, and that its accomplishment subsequently 
reveals the fact that certain of the many previous expressions 
of will of historical personages in connection with the said- 
event come to stand to it (through time and subsequent inter- 
pretation) in the relation of commands. Once arrived at this 
conclusion, we are in a position to return a direct and positive 
answer to the two essential questions of history—namely, * What 
is power?" and “ What is the force which produces the movements 
of nations?” 

Power is such a relation ot an individual to other individuals 
that, the smaller his direct participation in the joint action of 
those individuals, the more is he free to give expression to 
ideas, proposals, and justifications with regard to the progress 
of that joint action. As for the movements of nations, they are 
due, not to power, nor to intellectual activity, nor to combina- 
tions of the two (as some historians have supposed), but to the 
activity of all the persons taking part in an event; the manner 
of combination of those persons invariably being that those 
of them who play the greatest direct part in the event take 
upon themselves the smallest share of responsibility, and 
vice versa. 

Morally, the cause of an event is power: physically, its 
cause is persons who are subject to power. Yet, inasmuch as 
a moral agency without a physical one is unthinkable, the 
cause of an event lies neither in the one nor in the other, but 
in a combination of both. In other words, to the phenomenon 
which we may be observing no idea as to its cause is ever really 
applicable. In all ultimati analysis we approach the circle of 
infinity—approach the ultimate boundary at which the human 
intellect eventually arrives, in every department of thought, 
if it does not trifle with the subject in hand. Thus, electricity 


450 


EPILOGUE 


produces heat, and heat electricity. Atoms are attracted to 
one another, and atoms are repelled. Yet, in speaking of the 
inter-reaction of heat and electricity and of the inter-action 
of atoms, we cannot tell why these things are so. All that we 
can tell is that they are so because for them to be otherwise 
would be unthinkable—because there is a law to that effect. 
The same with regard to historical phenomena. All that we 
know is that, to accomplish this, that, or the other action, men 
unite in a combination in which they all participate. Accord- 
ingly we say that it is so because for it to be otherwise would 
be unthinkable—because there is a law to that effect. 


CHAPTER CLIV 


Ir history had to do with external phenomena only, mere 
statement of such a simple and obvious law would have been 
sufficient for our purpose, and our discussion would have ended. 
But the laws of history refer to man, and, although a mere 
fragment of substance cannot speak and tell us that it feels 
no impulse towards attraction or repulsion—that, in fact, we 
are wrong, man—the subject of history—can tell us to our 
faces: *I am free, and therefore subject to no laws.” 

The presence of an unexpressed question as to the nature of 
the freedom of the human will makes itself felt at every step in 
history. Every seriously thinking historian has involuntarily 
touched upon the point. All the contradictions and obscurities 
of history—the whole fallacious road which that science has 
travelled—have been based upon the non-decision of the 
problem. 

If the will of every man were free, i.e. if every man could do 
exactly as he pleased—history would be a mere series of dis- 
connected accidents. If but one man out of several millions had 
the power, once in a thousand years, to act freely, i.e. entirely 
according to his own will, it is clear that, should his free action 
transgress a single law, laws could no longer exist at all for 
humanity. If, on the other hand, one and the same law were 
to govern the acts of all humanity, there could exist no free-will, 
since the will of all humanity would be subject to that law. In 
this contradiction lies the problem of the freedom of human 


451 


WAR AND PEACE 


will which from earliest times had occupied the best intellects 
of mankind, and has always appeared to them of the deepest 
importance. 

The problem lies in the fact that, if we look upon man as 
a subject for study only (whether from the theological, the 
historical, the ethical, the philosophical, or any other point of 
view), we come upon a general law of necessity to which he, 
like everything else in existence, is subject; yet, if we look upon 
him also as something representing our own consciousness, we 
feel that we are free. This consciousness of ourselves is a 
source of self-realisation quite apart from and independent 
of reason. True, it is through reason that man can Survey 
himself, but it is only through consciousness that he knows 
himself. Without consciousness of self, both the power of 
observation and the application of the reasoning faculty would- 
be unthinkable. 

In order to understand, observe, and remember, man must 
first of all become conscious of himself as a living being. He 
becomes conscious of his vitality primarily through his desires, 
i.e. through his will. When he becomes aware of his will as con- 
stituting the essence of his life, he is bound to recognise it as free. 
If, in the exercise of his powers of observation, man perceives 
that his will is governed by one unfailing law (whether by the 
necessity of his taking food, by the action of his brain, or by 
any other phenomenon which he may remark), he is unable to 
comprehend this invariable and uniform direction of his will 
otherwise than through its limitation. What is not free 
cannot be limited, and therefore man’s will appears to admit 
capability of limitation for the reason that he feels it is free. 
Even though he were to say, “I am not free, yet I can raise 
and lower my hand,” everyone would recognise that seemingly 
illogical speech as an incontestable proof of his freedom. It 
would be an expression of consciousness not subject to reason. 
If the consciousness of freedom were not a source of self-realisa- 
tion separate from and independent of reason, it would be 
subject to reflection and experience; whereas, in point of fact, 
such subjection to reflection and experience is never to be met 
with, and is altogether unthinkable. 

Every man learns from reflection and experience that he, like 
any other phenomenon observable, is subject to given laws. 
Accordingly, he submits himself to their working, and makes no 
attempt to resist any such law when once he has become aware 
of its existence. Yet reflection and experience also teach him 


452 


EPILOGUE 


that full exercise of the freedom which he recognises to lie 
within him is impossible, and that every act of his depends upon 
his particular organism, his character, and the motives which 
inspire that character. At the same time, he never wholly 
accepts the deductions of reflection and experience. Having 
learnt by experience and reasoning that a stone falls downwards, 
a man believes it absolutely and in every case expects the working 
of this law, but, having learnt just as certainly, that his will is 
subject to laws, he does not and cannot believe it. However 
often reflection and experience may show a man that, given 
the same conditions and character, be will always, at a given 
juncture, do precisely what he did before, he will none the 
less feel assured, when, for, perhaps, the thousandth time, 
he engages in action which has hitherto always ended in the 
same way, that he can act as he pleases. Every man who 
follows the natural bent of his reflections will feel—despite 
the many undeniable teachings of reflection and experience 
that it is impossible for him to conceive of two different courses 
of action for himself under identical circumstances—that, 
without such an unreasonable conception (a conception which 
none the less constitutes the essence of freedom), he could 
not so much as conceive of the possibility of living at all. 
He will feel that, however impossible such a conception may 
be, he has no choice but to conceive it, seeing that, without 
some conception of freedom, he could never either understand 
life or endure it for a single moment. The reason why life 
would be intolerable to him is that all the aspirations of man, 
all his incitements to live, are so many aspirations towards 
an increase of freedom. Wealth and poverty, fame and 
obscurity, power and subjection, strength and weakness, health 
and sickness, education and illiteracy, labour and ease, plenty 
and want, generosity and stinginess, are all of them greater or 
less degrees of freedom. To imagine a man wholly destitute of 
freedom would be like imagining a man destitute of life. 

If, then, reason looks upon the idea of freedom as a contra- 
diction as senseless as the possibility of accomplishing two acts 
at the same moment of time, or as the idea of action without 
a cause of any kind, it merely proves that consciousness is not 
subject to reason. This unshakable, incontrovertible con- 
sciousness of freedom—a consciousness which is not subject 
either to reflection or to experience, and is recognised by all 
thinkers, and felt by all mankind—is an entity without which 
no portrayal of humanity would be so much as imaginable. 


453 


WAR AND PEACE 


Likewise, it is an entity which opens up other sides of our 
question. 

Man is the creation of an all-powerful, all-righteous, and 
all-knowing God. What, then, is sin?—of which the idea 
arises out of man’s consciousness of freedom. Here we have 
a question of theology. The acts of man are subject to general 
and immutable laws which can be expressed in tabular form. 
Wherein, then, does the responsibility of man to the com- 
munity consist ?—another idea which arises out of man's con- 
sciousness of freedom. Here we have a question of law. Man’s 
acts spring from his inmost character and the motives which 
influence it. What, then, is conscience, i.e. the perception of 
good or evil in acts which arise out of the consciousness of 
freedom? Here we have a question of ethics. So long as man 
lives in communion with the general life of humanity, he appears _ 
subject to laws determining that life. Yet, living independently 
of such communion, he appears free. How, then, ought the 
bygone life of nations and humanity to be regarded? As the 
product of the free or the restricted activity of man? Here we 
have a question of history. 

Only during this self-confident age of ours—the age of the 
popularisation of knowledge through the instrumentality of 
printing (the most potent of weapons though it be against 
ignorance), has the question of free-will reached the basis when 
it can no longer remain a question. This era of ours has seen a 
multitude of so-called “leading men,”—i.e. a crowd of ignora- 
muses—plunge into scientific investigation, on the system of 
pursuing one side of a question only in order to arrive at the 
whole. They say that we have neither consciousness nor 
freedom, for the reason that the life of man is expressed by 
muscular motions, and that those muscular motions are con- 
ditioned by the working of the nervous system. They say, 
too, that we have neither consciousness nor freedom for the 
reason that some unknown period of time has seen us gradually 
become evolved from apes. Thus they write and speak and 
print, without so much as suspecting that not only was the very 
law of necessity which they now strive to prove by physiology 
and comparative zoology recognised a thousand years ago by all 
religions and thinkers, but that it has never been denied. They 
do not see that the proper role of the natural sciences, as regards 
this question, is to throw light upon one particular side of it, 
since the fact that, regarded from the strictly scientific point of 
view, both reason and will are “secretions” of the brain, and 


454 


EPILOGUE 


that man, following a universal law, has gradually developed 
from the lower animals, merely proves from one point of view 
only the truth of what was recognised by all religions and 
philosophical systems so long as a thousand years ago—namcely, 
the fact that, viewed through reason, man is subject to the law 
of necessity. But it does not further by an iota the solution 
of the question that has a contrary side, based on the 
consciousness of freedom. 

If an unknown period of time has seen man develop from 
apes, that at least is as intelligible as that a known instant of 
time has seen him spring from a handful of dust. However, 
the question of how man’s consciousness of freedom combines 
with the law of necessity cannot be decided by comparative 
physiology and zoology at all, seeing that, whereas in the frog, 
the rabbit, or the ape it is only the muscular-nervous action 
that lies open to our observation, in man we can observe working, 
not only in the muscular-nervous action, but also consciousness 
as well. Purely scientific investigators and their disciples who 
think that they can finally decide this question are like plas- 
terers who are ordered to stucco the walls of a church, but take 
advantage of their foreman's absence to show their zeal by 
smearing their material over windows, ikons, and partition 
walls alike—satisfied only if, from their plasterer's point of 
view, everything comes out looking smooth and even all over. 


CHAPTER CLV 


For history, the decision of the question of freedom and 
necessity has this advantage over other branches of learning 
in which the question has been finally decided, that, in so far 
as history is concerned, the question has to do, not with the 
actual nature of the human will, but with manifestations of 
that will which we find presented in the past under definite 
conditions. In deciding this question, history stands to the 
other sciences in the relation of an experimental pursuit to 
speculative pursuits. History has for its subject, not the will 
of man itself, but our conceptions of it, and therefore there 
exists for this science no such insoluble mystery in the union 
of the contradictory ideas of freedom and necessity as there 
exists for theology, ethics, and philosophy. History pays 
regard only to presentments of the life of man in which the 
union of the two contradictions has become accomplished. 


455 


WAR AND PEACE 


Every historical event in human life, every act of mankind, 
can be comprehended clearly, exactly, and with no sense of 
contradiction, even though every such event will be seen to be 
partly spontaneous and partly dependent upon causes. For 
the decision of the question of the manner in which freedom 
and necessity combine, and of what constitutes the essence of 
those two ideas, the philosophy of history can and must follow 
a path contrary to the path followed by the other sciences. 
Instead of first of all defining the actual ideas of freedom and 
necessity, and then bringing under those definitions all the 
phenomena of life, history must deduce its definitions of those 
ideas from the multitude of phenomena which it embraces— 
phenomena which are always themselves dependent upon 
freedom and necessity. 

Whatsoever presentment of the activity of one or more human 
beings we investigate, we can comprehend it only as the product 
partly of man’s freedom and partly of the law of necessity. 
Whether speaking of the great migration of nations and the 
accompanying raids of the barbarians, or of the dispositions 
of Napoleon III, or of the act of a man which occurred an 
hour ago and consisted only of his choosing one of several 
directions in which to walk, we see no contradictions in those 
various phenomena—the measure of freedom or necessity 
which governed those acts of certain individuals is clear and 
definite to our sight. 

Frequently, however, our conception of the greater or less 
freedom of humanity differs with the point of view from which 
we observe a given phenomenon. Yet every act of mankind 
is more or less bound to appear a conjunction of freedom and 
necessity. In every act observed we see a given measure of the 
one and a given measure of the other, and, the more freedom 
there may be perceptible in a given act, the less necessity will 
there be apparent in it, and vice versa. The ratio of freedom 
to necessity increases or diminishes according to the point of 
view from which a given act is observed, yet remains always 
inversely proportional. A drowning man who clutches hold 
of another one in the same plight and drags him under, or a 
starving mother who is exhausted with feeding her baby and 
steals food for it, or a man who is inured to discipline and so 
slays a defenceless fellow-creature because he is ordered to do 
so, will seem to the observer who knows the circumstances 
in which those persons were placed to have been less guilty— 
ie. more subject to the law of necessity—than they will seem 


456 


EPILOGUE 


to an observer who is unaware of the fact that the man was 
drowning, or that the woman was starving, or that the soldier 
was bound to obey orders. To such an observer their acts 
will seem to have been free rather than subject to the law of 
necessity. In the same way, to an observer who views a crime 
some twenty years after its commission the criminal will seem 
to have been less guilty, i.e. less independent of the law of 
necessity—than he will seem to the observer who views the 
crime the day after it is perpetrated. Again, every act of a 
madman, a drunkard, or a man greatly provoked will seem to 
the observer aware of the mental condition of the culprit at 
the time of the deed to have been less spontaneous and more 
subject to necessity than it will seem to the observer who is 
unaware of the special factors involved. In all these cases the 
idea of necessity increases or diminishes with the point of view 
from which the act is observed. Thus, the greater the estimate 
of necessity, the smaller the estimate of freedom, and vice versa. 

Religion, the trained thought of humanity, the science of 
law, and history itself all understand this relation between 
freedom and necessity in the same way. All cases whatsoever 
in which our conceptions of freedom or necessity are subject 
to increase or diminution are founded upon three bases—namely, 
(r) the relation of the doer of the given act to the external 
world, (2) his relation to time, and (3) his relation to the causes 
which produced the act. 

The first of these bases is what we conceive to be the more or 
less intimate relation of a man to the external world—our more 
or less clear conception of the definite place which every man 
occupies with regard to everything existing at the same time 
as himself. It is this basis which enables us to perceive that 
a drowning man is less free and more subject to the law of 
necessity than a man standing on dry land, as well as that the 
acts of a man living in association with others and in a populated 
district—the acts of a man possessing ties of family, of common 
pursuits and common enterprises—appear less free and more 
subject to the law of necessity than those of a man living alone 
and in isolation. If we observe a man living alone and without 
any connection with his environment, every act of his will 
appear to us free: yet if we observe any point also in his relation 
to his surroundings, if we observe his connection with anything 
whatsoever—whether with a man to whom he is speaking, 
with a book which he is reading, with work in which he is 
engaged, with the atmosphere which surrounds him, or with 


457 


WAR AND PEACE 


the light which falls upon objects in his vicinity—we see that 
each of those conditions has an influence upon him, and governs 
one particular side of his activity. And in so far as we perceive 
those influences, our conception of his freedom is diminished, 
and our conception of the necessity to which he is subject 
increased. 

The second of those bases is what we conceive to be the more 
or less distant connection of a man with the external world in 
point of fime. That is to say, it constitutes our more or less 
clear estimate of the place which the acts of that man fill in 
the onward progress of time. It is this basis which causes the 
fall of primeval man—the catastrophe from which resulted the 
human race—to seem to us less free than the present-day entry 
of man into wedlock, yet also causes the lives and the doings 
of men who lived their lives centuries ago (lives, none the less, - 
intimately connected with our own) to seem to us less free 
than contemporary life, the consequences of which are, as yet, 
unknown to us. Thus the graduation of our conceptions 
concerning greater or less freedom and greater or less necessity 
in this connection depends upon the greater or less interval of 
time which has elapsed between the commission of an act 
and our judgment of the same. If I observe an act which I 
committed a moment ago, and committed under conditions 
approximately identical with those under which I now stand, 
my act will seem to me to have been wholly free: yet if I consider 
an act committed by myself a month ago, I—if now standing 
under different conditions—will recognise insensibly that, had 
the act not been committed, much that was useful, agreeable, 
and even indispensable to me would never have fallen to my 
lot as its result. If I carry my memory back to an event still 
more remote—say, to one committed ten years ago, or more 
—the consequences of that act will seem to me even clearer 
than those of the one just mentioned, and I shall find it hard 
to realise what my life might have been like had I never com- 
mitted the act. The further I carry my recollections back— 
or (which is the same thing) the further I cast my power of 
apprehension forward—the more will my judgment concerning 
the freedom of a given act become doubtful. 

The same process of conviction concerning the participation 
of free-will in the general affairs of humanity is to be found 
operative in history. An event which takes place in our own 
time seems to us the undoubted outcome of certain given 
individuals, but in the case of an event more remote we have 


458 


EPILOGUE 


had time to observe its inevitable consequences, and could not 
now imagine them otherwise. Thus, the further we go back 
in our observation of events, the less do they seem to us to have 
been spontaneous, The Austro-Prussian war appears to us the 
indubitable consequence of the cunning action of Bismarck 
and others. The Napoleonic wars seem to us more doubtful, 
but none the less the outcome of the wills of supermen. When 
we get back to the Crusades, however, we see in them an event 
occupying a definite place as an occurrence without which 
the modern history of Europe could never have come to be. 
Yet, to the early chroniclers of that war-like movement, the 
Crusades must have seemed the outcome solely of the wills 
of certain individuals. In the case, too, of the great migration 
of races, it would never now enter into anyone’s head to ascribe 
that resettling of the European world to the mere will of Attila. 
In short, the further we go back into history for our subjects 
of observation, the clearer does the law of necessity become. 

The third basis is the greater or less extent to which we can 
trace the endless series of causes in which every phenomenon 
observed (and therefore every act of mankind) has its place as, 
for those who preceded it, a result and, for those who came later, 
a cause. It is this basis which causes the acts of ourselves and 
of our fellow-men to appear to us the more free and the less 
subject to necessity in proportion as, on the one hand, we are 
the more conversant with the physiological, psychological, and 
historical laws to which man is subject and of which we gain 
knowledge through observation, as well as the more correctly 
apprehend the physiological, psychological, or historical cause 
of a given act, and, on the other hand, in proportion as the act 
itself was the simpler, and the individual whose action we are 
studying was the less complex in his character and intellect. 

It is when we in no way comprehend the cause of an act— 
no matter whether it be a cruel or a beneficent act, or an act 
which is neither the one nor the other—that we recognise in the 
act in question the greatest measure of freedom. In the case 
of a cruel act, we look, first of all, for a penalty for its commission ; 
in the case of a beneficent act, we appraise, first of all, its 
value as such; and when the act is neither the one nor the 
other, we look, first of all, to its degree of individuality, 
originality, or freedom. Yet, let but one of its countless causes 
become known to us, and we at once recognise in the act a given 
measure of necessity. Consequently we demand less retribution 
if the act was a crime, and recognise in it less beneficence or 


459 


WAR AND PEACE 


freedom according as it was an act of beneficence or originality. 
For instance, the fact that a criminal was reared among wrong- 
doers goes to mitigate his culpability. The self-sacrifice of 
a father or mother is more intelligible if its cause is the hope 
of gain than without a cause at all, and therefore less free 
and less deserving of sympathy. The founder of a new sect 
or the organiser of a new party surprises us less when we learn 
how and through what agency his action came to occur. If 
we possess a large range of experience, if our observation has 
been continuously directed to investigating the correlation 
between causes and effects in the acts of men, then their acts 
appear to us the more subject to necessity and the less free 
according as we the more correctly connect effects with causes. 
If the acts observed are simple and a large number of them 
is available for observation, our conception of the extent to. 
which they were subject to necessity will be the more complete. 
The dishonest son of a dishonest father, the lewd behaviour 
of a woman who has sunk to a certain level of society, the 
relapse into alcoholism of a drunkard, and so forth, are all of 
them acts which appear to us the less free according as we the 
better comprehend their causes. If the human being whose 
act we are observing stands on the lowest level of mental 
development (such as an infant, a madman, or an imbecile), we 
know the cause of his or her action and the defective state of 
his or her character or intellect, and therefore see so large 
a measure of necessity and so small a measure of freedom in 
their action that, as soon as ever we know the cause which was 
bound to produce that action, we can foretell any given act 
on their part. 

It is upon these three bases alone that both the non- 
imputability of crime which exists in all legal systems and the 
circumstances which go to extenuate guilt are founded. The 
imputability of crime appears to us to be greater or less according 
to our greater or less knowledge of the circumstances under which 
the individual was placed, while his or her act is conditioned 
also in our estimate of it by the greater or less interval of time 
which may have elapsed between the actual commission of the 
act and our judgment of its merits, as well as by our greater or 
less comprehension of its causes, 


460 


EPILOGUE 


CHAPTER CLVI 


Tuus our conceptions of freedom or necessity increase or 
diminish with the greater or less connection of the individual 
with the external world, with the greater or less interval of time 
involved, and with the greater or less dependence of an act upon 
causes. Accordingly, if we select for observation a point in the 
life of a man in which his connection with the external world 
is as intimate as possible, the interval of time which has elapsed 
since a given act on his part is as great as possible, and the 
causes of that act are as readily comprehensible as possible, we 
shall acquire a conception of the greatest possible measure of 
necessity governing the act and the least possible measure of 
freedom in the same. On the other hand, if we select for obser- 
vation a man in the least possible dependence upon external con- 
ditions, and observe a given act of his which was accomplished at 
the nearest possible moment to the present time, and of which 
the causes are wholly unfathomable by us, we shall acquire a con- 
ception of the least possible measure of necessity governing the 
act and the greatest possible measure of freedom in the same. 
Yet neither in the one case nor in the other shall we ever be able 
to imagine to ourselves absolute freedom or absolute necessity— 
and that no matter how much we keep changing our point of 
view, or striving to elucidate the connection between the given 
individual and the external world, or lengthening or shortening 
the period of time in the case, or understanding, or failing to 
understand, the causes of the action of the individual con- 
cerned. 

Firstly, with regard to the connection with the external world 
— hewever much we may imagine an individual excluded from 
all influences of that world, we shall never gain an idea of 
freedom in space, since every act of every individual is bound to 
be conditioned by his surroundings, and even by his body. Let 
us suppose that I raise my arm and lower it again. My action 
seems to me to have been purely free, yet, if I ask myself 
whether I can raise my arm in any direction, I soon perceive 
that I only raise my arm in those directions in which the bodies 
of those around me, as well as the structure of my own body, 
offer the fewest obstacles to my movement. If of all possible 
directions I thus choose a particular one, it is because in that 
direction lie the smallest number of impediments. Therefore, 


461 


WAR AND PEACE 


to imagine a person wholly free we must at least imagine him 
standing outside space—which is manifestly impossible. 

Secondly, with regard to time—however much the moment 
of the accomplishment of an act may approximate to the 
moment of our judgment of the same, we shall never gain an 
idea of freedom in time, seeing that, even though I may observe 
an act accomplished but a second ago, I am bound to recognise 
that that act had in it no freedom, for the reason that it was 
conditioned by the moment of time during which it was per- 
formed. For instance, I may say to myself, “Can I raise my 
hand?” and straightway I raise it. Yet I did not raise it 
precisely at the moment when it first occurred to me to ask 
myself the question concerning my freedom. Time has gone by 
which it was not in my power to restrain, and the hand which I 
then raised, and the air in which I made the movement, were 
not the same hand which now hangs passively beside me or the 
same air which now surrounds my body. The moment at 
which the movement was accomplished can never return, and 
during that moment I was able to make one movement and no 
more, while, whatsoever movement I had made, it could have 
been the only one. The fact that during the next moment I 
did not raise my hand did not prove that I could not raise it: 
it merely proved that, inasmuch as any movement of mine 
could have been one only during a single moment of time, my 
hand could not then have been executing any other movement 
than what it was executing. To imagine that movement a free 
movement would mean imagining it as having occurred precisely 
in the present, i.e. precisely at the boundary-line which divides 
the future from the past, and so outside of time: which would 
have been impossible. 

Thirdly, however much we may strive to comprehend the 
causes of given acts, we shall never attain to a conception of 
absolute freedom in the sense of a cause being altogether lacking. 
However much we may fail to understand the cause of a given 
expression of will (as manifested in an act of ourselves or of 
others), the first demand of our intellect is for an hypothesis of, 
and an investigation into, the cause of that expression of will, 
since, without a cause, no phenomenon of human life is even 
imaginable. However much I might raise my hand with the 
object of accomplishing an act which should be independent of 
any cause whatever, the mere fact of my having wished to 
perform the act would become the cause of its accomplishment. 

Even if we could imagine a man wholly secluded from 


462 


EPILOGUE 


external influences in connection with an act performed by him 
in the present and derived from no cause whatsoever, we should 
still have to admit an infinitesimal measure of necessity, even 
if only equal to a cipher, seeing that a being who was subject to 
no influence whatsoever from the external world, and stood 
outside of time, and was independent of causes, would not be a 
human being at all. Similarly, we could never imagine any 
human act as altogether destitute of freedom and subject 
wholly to the law of necessity. 

In the first place, however much we may increase our know- 
ledge of the conditions of space under which man lives, that 
knowledge can never be complete, for the reason that the 
number of those conditions is as infinite as space is boundless. 
Therefore so long as we are unable to determine afl the condi- 
tions which influence man, so long can absolute necessity never 
exist, since there must always be in him a certain measure of 
freedom. 

In the second place, however great be the period of time 
elapsing between the occurrence of a given phenomenon and 
the moment of our consideration of it, that period will always 
be bounded—and time is boundless. Therefore, in this regard 
also absolute necessity can never exist. 

In the third place, however comprehensible be the purpose of 
the causes of a given act, we can never know that purpose in its 
entirety, since it is infinite. Once again, therefore, we can never 
attain to a conception of absolute necessity. 

Moreover, if, after admitting only the smallest possible 
measure of necessity, we should recognise in certain cases (as, 
for example, that of a dying man, or of an embryo, or of an 
idiot) complete absence of freedom, we should, by so doing, 
destroy the very idea of man which we hold at present, seeing 
that man wholly devoid of freedom is unthinkable. There- 
fore, any conception of the act of a human being as an act 
wholly subject to the law of necessity and devoid of any particle 
of freedom is as impossible as is any conception of a human 
being as wholly free. 

Thus, to imagine a human act wholly subject to the law of 
necessity, we should have to assume knowledge of all the 
infinite number of conditions of space, as well as power to 
understand both the infinitude of time and the infinite range of 
possible causes. On the other hand, to imagine a human being 
wholly free and in no way subject to the law of necessity, we 
should have to imagine a being standing outside of space, of 


463 


WAR AND PEACE 


time, and of dependence upon causes. In the one case, if 
necessity were possible without freedom, we should arrive at a 
limitation (through laws) of necessity by necessity, ie. at a 
torm devoid of substance; while, in the other case, if freedom 
were possible without necessity, we should arrive at uncondi- 
tional freedom (i.e. freedom independent of space, of time, or 
of causes), and this freedom, through the very fact of its being 
unconditional and limited by nothing, would itself be nothing, 
or substance without form. In general, then, we should arrive 
at the two bases upon which the whole outlook of man is founded 
—namley, the unattainable essence of life, and the laws which 
define that essence. 

Reason says: “(1) Space, with all the forms which its 
perceptibility—i.e. its material—gives it, is boundless, and 
unimaginable otherwise. (2) Time is an endless progression, 
without a moment's cessation, and unimaginable otherwise. 
(3) The connection between causes and effects has no beginning, 
and can have no end." Consciousness, on the other hand, says: 
"(1) I am one, and all that exists is I alone. Therefore I 
include space also. (2) I measure time by the immovable 
moment of the present, in which alone I am conscious of myself 
as a living being. Therefore I stand outside of time. (3)Iam 
independent of causes, since I feel myself to be the cause of 
every phenomenon occurring in my life." 

Reason, then, expresses the laws of necessity ; consciousness 
the essence of freedom. F reedom, bounded by nothing, is the 
substance of life as it appears to man's consciousness ; necessity, 
uncombined with that substance, is man's reason as expressed 
in the above three formule. Freedom is what is observed ; 
necessity is what observes. Freedom is the substance, neces- 
sity is the form. Only by separating these two sources of self- 
comprehension (which are to one another as form to substance) 
can we gain distinct ideas of freedom and necessity—ideas 
which, when combined, are both incomprehensible and mutually 
exclusive. Likewise it is only by uniting them that we can 
gain a clear conception of the life of man. Apart from these 
two ideas thus mutually limiting one another when united no 
conception of life is possible. All that we know of human life 
is summed up in a certain definite relation of freedom to neces- 
sity—of consciousness to the laws of reason. All that we know 
of the external world of nature is summed up in a certain 
definite relation of the forces of nature to necessity—of the 
essence of life to the laws of reason. The forces of the life of 


464 


EPILOGUE 


nature lie without us, and are not felt by us, although we may 
call them attraction, inertia, electricity, animal force, and so 
forth: but the force of human life is felt by us, and we call it 
freedom. ^ 

Yet, just as the incomprehensible force of attraction (which 
is realised by every human being) is understood by us only in 
so far as we know the laws of necessity to which it is subject 
(from our knowledge of the fact that all bodies have weight up 
to the law of Newton), so the incomprehensible force of freedom 
(which likewise is realised by every human being) is understood 
by us only in so far as we know the laws of necessity to which it 
is, in its turn, subject (from the fact that man is mortal up to a 
knowledge of the exceedingly complex laws of economics Or 
history). All knowledge is a process of bringing the essence of 
life under the laws of reason. The freedom of man is distin- 
guished from any other force by the fact that it is a force of 
which his consciousness is aware, but from the point of reason 
it differs in no way from other forces. The forces of attraction, 
of electricity, or of any kind of chemical affinity are distinguished 
from one another solely by the fact that they are forces differ- 
ently defined by reason. Similarly, reason looks upon the 
force of man’s freedom as distinguished from all other forces of 
nature solely by the definition given to it by reason itself. 
Freedom without necessity, i.e. without the laws by which 
reason defines it—is in no way distinguishable from attraction 
or heat or the force of growth. In the eyes of reason it is only 
a momentary, indeterminate perception of life. Just as the 
undefined substance of the force which moves the heavenly 
bodies, or the undefined substance of the forces of heat or of 
electricity or of any chemical affinity or of life, constitutes the 
substance of astronomy, physics, chemistry, botany, zoology, 
and so forth, so the substance of the force of freedom constitutes 
the substance of history. Just, also, as the subject of any 
science is the manifestation of the unknown substance of life, 
while the substance itself constitutes the subject only of meta- 
physics, so the manifestation of the force of human freedom in 
space, in time, and in dependence upon causes is the subject of 
history, while to metaphysics alone belongs the study of freedom 
itself. 

In the experimental sciences, all that we know of them we 
call laws of necessity; what we do not know of them we call 
the force of life. Yet the force of life is only an expression for 
what we do not know concerning the substance of life. So too 


465 


WAR AND PEACE 


with history. What we know of it we call laws of necessity; 
what we do not know of it we call freedom. For history, 
freedom is only an expression connoting what we do not know 
concerning the laws of human life, 


CHAPTER CLVII 


History has to do with manifestations of human freedom in 
connection with the external world, with time, and with de- 
pendence upon causes. That is to say, it defines that freedom 
by the laws of reason, and is therefore a science only in so far as 
freedom is capable of definition by those laws. For history, 
the recognition of human freedom as a force able to influence 
historical events, i.e. as a force subject to no laws—would be 
what the recognition of a free force governing the movement 
of the heavenly bodies would be for astronomy. Such a recog- 
nition would destroy the very possibility of the existence of 
laws, i.e. of there being any such thing as knowledge. If but 
one freely moving body could exist there could no longer exist 
the laws of Keppler and Newton » hor yet any conceptions con- 
cerning the movements of the heavenly bodies. If there could 
occur but one free act of a human being, there could no longer 
exist any laws of history, nor yet any conceptions concerning 
historical events. 

For history there exist lines of movement of human wills, one 
end of which is hidden in the unknown, and at the other one 
moves—both through space, through time, and in dependence 
upon causes—humanity’s consciousness of itself in the present. 
The more our field of vision becomes extended in this regard, 
the clearer do the laws of that movement become. To appre- 
hend and to define those laws constitutes the function of 
history. 

From the point of view from which that science now regards 
its subject, and judging by the route which it now takes in its 
investigations into the causes of phenomena manifested in the 
free-will of human beings, the expression of laws is, for history, 
impossible, seeing that, however much we may set bounds to 
human freedom, we no sooner recognise it as a force not subject 
to laws than the existence of any law at all becomes impossible. 
We have merely to limit that freedom to infinity, i.e. to look 
upon it as an infinitely small entity—to become convinced of 


466 


EPILOGUE 


our inability to comprehend the causes of things. Therefore, 
putting causes aside, history now adopts for its task the 
investigation of historical laws. 

The investigation of those laws was begun long ago, and with 
the self-destruction which the older history is bringing upon 
itself as it increasingly abandons research into the causes of 
phenomena there are becoming evolved new methods of 
historical thought. By the same road have all the human 
sciences travelled. To arrive at the infinitely small, even 
mathematics—the most exact of all the sciences—has resigned 
the process of resolution in favour of the new process of sum- 
marising the various infinitely small fractions which it considers. 
Abandoning the conception of a cause, mathematics now seeks 
laws, i.e. qualities common to all the unknown and infinitely 
small elements of a problem. 

A similar course (for, though differing in form, that course has 
always remained substantially the same) has been followed by 
the other sciences also. When Newton enunciated his law of 
attraction he did not say that the sun or the earth could attract. 
What he said was that every body, from the largest to the 
smallest, had the quality of seeming to attract others. That is 
to say, he set aside the question of the cause of the movement 
of celestial bodies, and expressed only a characteristic common 
to all bodies, from the largest to the smallest. That is what 
the natural sciences do. Setting aside the question of a cause, 
they investigate laws. Consequently, if history is to have for 
its subject the study of the movements of nations and humanity, 
and not merely descriptions of episodes in human life, it must 
likewise abandon the idea of causes, and apply itself to the 
laws which are common to all the minute and indissolubly 
connected elements of freedom. 


CHAPTER CLVIII 


IMMEDIATELY that the law of Copernicus was discovered and 
enunciated, the mere recognition of the fact that the sun does 
not move, but the earth, destroyed the whole cosmography of 
the ancients. Without that law being controverted, and the 
old view as to the movements of the heavenly bodies retained, 
it would have seemed impossible to continue the study of the 
old Ptolemaic worlds; yet, even after the discovery of the law 


467 


WAR AND PEACE 


of Copernicus, those Ptolemaic worlds continued to be studied. 
Similarly, immediately that the first man declared and proved 
that the number of births and the number of crimes are both 
of them subject to mathematical laws, that certain geo- 
graphical and politico-economic conditions determine this, that, 
or the other form of government, and that certain relations of 
population to the soil produce popular movements, the very 
bases upon which history had rested hitherto were destroyed. 
Without those new laws being controverted, and the old view of 
history retained, it would have seemed impossible to continue 
the study of historical events as though they were the product 
of the free-will of mankind. For, if such and such a form was 
established, and such and such a movement of a nation brought 
about through the agency of such and such geographical, ethno- 
graphical, or economic conditions, then the will of the indivi- 
duals who are represented as having established the given form 
of government, or as having originated the given movement of 
a nation, cannot be looked upon as the cause of those phenomena. 
Yet the older history continues to be studied part passu with 
the laws of statistics, geography, political economy, compara- 
tive philology, and geology—all of which directly contradict its 
propositions. Long and stubbornly has the struggle between 
the older and the newer views been carried on by physical 
philosophy. For a while theology stood guard over the older 
‘view, and accused the newer one of impeaching revelation; 
but when the truth conquered, theology rebuilt its house as 
firmly as before on the new ground. In history also the present 
struggle between the older and the newer views is being carried 
on with stubbornness and persistency—theology, as before, 
standing guard over the older view and accusing the newer one 
of infringing revelation. Both in the one case and in the other 
the contest evokes passions on both sides, and obscures the 
truth. On the one side it is a struggle evoked by fear and by 
regret for the learning which the ages have brought forth, while 
on the other side it is a struggle of a mere passion for destruction. 
To those persons who are contending against the rising truth of 
physical philosophy it would seem that, once they recognised 
that truth, their belief in God, in the creation of the universe, 
and in the miracle of Joshua, the son of Nun, would be shattered, 
while to the defenders of the laws of Copernicus and Newton it 
would seem that the laws of astronomy are essentially subver- 
sive of religion. Indeed, Voltaire even went so far as to use 
the law of attraction as a weapon against all religious belief. 


468 


EPILOGUE 


Similarly, some people at the present day suppose that, once 
they recognised the law of necessity, there would be an end to 
all conceptions of the soul and of good and evil, as well as to all 
state and ecclesiastical institutions which are founded upon 
those conceptions, while, like Voltaire before them, the un- 
recognised upholders of the law of necessity use it as a weapon 
against all religion—the truth being that, as, in astronomy, 
the law of Copernicus, so, in history, the law of necessity 
does nothing to destroy the ground upon which state and 
ecclesiastical institutions are based, but, if anything, tends to 
strengthen it. 

As once in the question of astronomy, so now in the question 
of history, the whole difference of view between the two sides is 
based upon the recognition or non-recognition of some absolute 
unit which serves as a standard for visible phenomena. In 
astronomy that unit used to be the immobility of the earth, 
while in history it is the independence of personality, or freedom. 
Just as in astronomy the difficulty of recognising the movement 
of the earth lay chiefly in the impossibility of denying one’s 
personal consciousness that the earth was stationary, so in 
history the difficulty of recognising the subordination of 
personality to the laws of space, of time, and of causality lies 
in the impossibility of denying one’s personal impression of being 
independent of those laws. Yet just, also, as in astronomy 
the new view said, “True, we are not conscious of the movement 
of the earth, yet if we were to allow that it is stationary we 
should arrive at an absurdity, whereas if we allow that it 
moves (though we may not actually feel it doing so), we shall 
arrive at laws,” so in history the new view says, “True, we are 
not conscious of our independence, yet if we were to allow that we 
are free we should arrive at an absurdity, whereas if we allow 
that we are dependent upon the external world, upon time, and 
upon causes, we shall arrive at laws.” In the former case, 
denial had to be made of all consciousness of an immobility in 
space which was non-existent, and recognition to be accorded to 
a movement which was not felt, so now, in the present case, 
denial must be made of a freedom which is non-existent, and 
recognition be accorded to a dependence of which we are not 


personally conscious. 


469 


pai hinds Foul 
"Crime rf erm tel tess otio vp 


ex jobrmdeudeto "not monos is - 


peat tens moe atizar tiss gu 


This book was designed by Wiliam B. Taylor 
and printed on wood-free paper, 
made by Papeteries de Belmont 
‘by Klausfelder S. A., Vevey 
The binding was executed 
by H. Weber AG., Winterthur 


AM 
Rey fu 


E 


Printed in Switzerland 


| wW ww wei aT 3 : 


Nee onte d N 
EL TT ME. ^ 
MEUS gl tan 


"e 
. bro eel ag 


sit 
rg 
E: 


e 
STA 
: Dy 
"Y 


TPA 


n 


ti 
mais o 
MCCC 


t E a 


